STANDARD AGREEMENT FOR PROFESSIONAL SERVICES BETWEEN THE CITY OF LA MESA AND HOME START , INC. FOR ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES FOR THE LA MESA RENTAL ASSISTANCE GRANT PROGRAM This Agreement is entered into by City of La Mesa as ofthis ] .day of ) RJer\.A , ( , 2020 , by and between the City of La Mesa , a municipal corporation , hereinafter referred to as `` the City `` , and Home Start , Inc. , hereinafter referred to as `` Contractor . `` WITNESSETH THAT : WHEREAS , the City has adopted Resolution No . 2020-083 ; WHEREAS , the City has need for professional services for Contractor to perform administrative services for the La Mesa Rental Assistance Grant Program and is willing to compensate Contractor for such services ; WHEREAS , the City desires to engage Contractor to render certain technical and professional services in the providing of said professional services ; and WHEREAS , Contractor is qualified to provide said professional services for administration of the La Mesa Rental Assistance Grant Program ; NOW THEREFORE , the parties do mutually agree as follows : SECTION 1 : ENGAGEMENT OF CONTRACTOR The City hereby agrees to engage Contractor and Contractor hereby agrees to perform the services set forth in this Agreement . The term of the Agreement shall be for a period of twelve ( 12 ) months subsequent to the date of execution of this Agreement . The Agreement may be renewed for an additional six ( 6 ) month term by mutual written consent of both parties . The City Manager shall have sole and exclusive right to exercise any options contained in this Agreement on behalf of the City . SECTION 2 : SERVICES TO BE PERFORMED BY CONTRACTOR Contractor shall commence performance of the Project upon execution of this Agreement by both parties . The term `` Project `` as used in this Agreement shall include all of the tasks and items listed and described in Exhibit `` A `` -Scope of Services , attached hereto and incorporated herein as part of this Agreement . SECTION 3 : KEY PROJECT PERSONNEL Contractor agrees to provide the services of Home Start , Inc. staff employed and located at 5005 Texas Street , Suite 203 , San Diego , CA 92108 . This location shall serve as Contractor 's main San Diego Office for the full term of this Agreement . The City reserves the right to request specific qualifications for key personnel under this section . I SECTION 4 : CONTRACTORS Contractor will utilize the services of the following subcontractors during the course of this study : None Payment for such services shall be the responsibility of the Contractor . No substitution of proposed subcontractors shall be made without prior written approval by the City . SECTION 5 : CITY REPRESENTATION Carlo Tomaino , Assistant City Manager in the City Manager 's Office for the City of La Mesa , or its designated representative , shall represent the City in all matters pertaining to the services rendered pursuant to this Agreement and shall administer said Agreement on behalf of the City . This person shall hereinafter be referred to as the `` City 's Representative . `` SECTION 6 : RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE CITY The City will provide the Contractor , or cause to be provided with , the following documents and services at no charge to the Contractor . A . Any and all known documents and files containing all necessary information pertaining to the La Mesa Rental Assistance Grant Program for the purpose of assisting Contractor in the performance of all tasks and items listed and described in Exhibit `` A `` -Scope of Services attached hereto and incorporated herein as part of this Agreement . SECTION 7 : PERFORMANCE SCHEDULE Both Contractor and the City recognize that time is of the essence in the completion of this work . Accordingly , the Contractor shall complete all of the work outlined in Exhibit `` A `` and described in this Agreement in accordance with the Scope of Services set forth in Exhibit `` A `` attached hereto and incorporated herein as part of this Agreement . The Contractor shall not be responsible for damages or be in default or deemed to be in default by reason of strikes , lockouts , accidents , or acts of God , or failure of City to furnish timely information or to approve or disapprove Contractor 's work promptly , or delay or faulty performance by City , or governmental agencies . In the event of a conflict between this Agreement and any documents incorporated by reference in this Agreement , the terms and conditions of this Agreement shall supersede those contained in any such document incorporated by reference . SECTION 8 : COMPENSATION TO CONTRACTOR City shall compensate Contractor in the amount of Seventy Five Thousand Dollars and Zero Cents ( $ 75,000.00 ) for the services performed as outlined in Exhibit `` B `` -Cost Proposal attached hereto and incorporated herein as part of this Agreement . SECTION 9 : RECORDS Contractor shall maintain adequate records to permit inspection audit of Contractor 's time-and-material charges under this Agreement . Contractor shall make such records available to the City and to other public agencies responsible for approval , funding or auditing the project , during normal business hours upon reasonable notice . Nothing herein shall convert such records into public records and they will be available only to the City or to public agencies involved with approval , funding or audit functions . Such records shall be maintained by the Contractor for three ( 3 ) years following completion of the work under this Agreement . SECTION 10 : METHOD OF COMPENSATION The City shall compensate Contractor for the services performed hereunder within thirty ( 30 ) calendar days of receipt of Contractor 's invoice for the services performed . The Contractor shall provide documentation on said invoice regarding time , materials , and labor that is sufficient to meet normal auditing practice . The City shall promptly review invoicing and notify Contractor of any objection thereto in writing within fifteen ( 15 ) days of receipt of the invoice ; absent such objection the invoice shall be deemed proper and acceptable . In the event that any undisputed invoice is not paid within thirty ( 30 ) calendar days after receipt of the invoice by the City , it shall commence bearing interest on the date that the invoice was rendered at the rate of 1 % per month and the City agrees to pay all accrued interest , together with the charges for services rendered . SECTION 11 : ITEMS TO BE DELIVERED TO CITY The items to be delivered by the Contractor to the City are as described in Exhibit `` A `` -Scope of Services attached hereto and incorporated herein as part of the Agreement . SECTION 12 : DESIGN CHANGES OR REVISIONS No design changes or revisions will be required and no payment therefor will be made except pursuant to the provisions of this Agreement . No extra compensation shall be paid the Contractor for revisions required by reason of omissions or errors by the Contractor in the preparation of the original document , plans , working drawings , or specifications . Changes to the scope of this Agreement shall be negotiated prior to commencement of extra work . SECTION 13 : HOLD HARMLESS To the furthest extent allowed by law , Contractor shall indemnify , hold harmless and defend City and each of its elected officials , officers , officials , employees , agents and volunteers from any and all loss , liability , fines , penalties , forfeitures , costs and damages ( whether in contract , tort or strict liability , including but not limited to personal injury , death at any time and property damage ) , incurred by City , Contractor or any other person , and from any and all claims , demands and actions in law or equity ( including reasonable attorney 's fees and litigation expenses ) , arising or alleged to have arisen directly or indirectly out of performance of this Contract . Contractor 's obligations under the preceding sentence shall apply regardless of whether City or any of its elected officials , officers , officials , employees , agents or volunteers are passively negligent , but shall not apply to any loss , liability , fines , penalties , forfeitures , costs or damages caused by the active or sole negligence , or the willful misconduct , of City or any of its elected officials , officers , officials , employees , agents or volunteers . If Contractor should subcontract all or any portion of the services to be performed under this Agreement , Contractor shall require each subcontractor to indemnify , hold harmless and defend City and each of

###

