SUBRECIPIENT AGREEMENT between CITY OF ESCONDIDO and INTERFAITH COMMUNITY SERVICES , INC. for the use of Emergency Solutions Grant ( ESG-CV ) Funds Provision of Homeless Outreach Services -- - This SUBRECIPIENT AGREEMENT ( `` Agreement `` ) is entered into as of this 2.-3 , day of 0 - .. > \'-'\ , 2021 ( `` Effective Date `` ) , by and between the City of Escondido , a California municipal corporatin ( `` Grantee `` ) , and Interfaith Community Services , Inc. , a California public benefit corporation ( `` Subrecipient `` ) . ( The City and Subrecipient may each individually be referred to herein as a `` Party and collectively as the `` Parties . `` ) WHEREAS , the Grantee has been allocated Emergency Solutions Grants program ( `` ESG `` ) stimulus funding through the Coronavirus Aid , Relief , and Economic Security ( CARES ) Act ( `` ESG-CV Funds `` ) from the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development ( `` HUD `` ) , pursuant to Subtitle B of Title IV of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act , as amended ( 42 U.S.C . 11371 -- 78 ) ( the `` Act `` ) , for the rehabilitation or conversion of buildings for use as emergency shelter for the homeless , for the payment of certain expenses related to operating emergency shelters , for essential services related to emergency shelters and street outreach for the homeless , and for homeless prevention and rapid re-housing assistance . [ Catalogue of Federal Domestic Assistance ( CFDA ) 14.23 ' 1 ; Federal Award Identification Number ( FAIN ) [ E-20-MW-06-0552 ] .J ; and WHEREAS , the Grantee has approved the provision of funds under the Act to be used by the Subrecipient as provided in the Subrecipient 's Work Plan , attached hereto as Exhibit A and incorporated herein by this reference , and as further modified by any negotiated Statement of Work ( `` Work Plan `` ) ; and WHEREAS , the Subrecipient represents that it shall perform the work as set forth in the Work Plan pursuant to the Budget , attached hereto as Exhibit B and incorporated herein by this refe : ence ( `` Budget `` ) ; and WHEREAS , the Subrecipient warrants that it has the expertise and experience to perform tile work set forth in the \fl.fork P ! an ; and WHEREAS , the Grantee shail pmvide ESG-CV Funds to the Subrecipient in the amount set forth in the Budget , and pursuant to the terms of this Agreernent ; and NOW , THEREFORE , in consideration of the foregoinQ recital : : and based on the mutual covenants , terms , and conditions expressed herein , the Parties mutually agr8e as follows : I . [ f ; R. The term of this Agreement shall be from the , .July 1 , 202 ' 1 through Jun : : 30 , 2022 ( `` Term `` ) . Subrncipient Agreement CAD : 2/24i2021 II . SCOPE OF SERVICES A General Administration . In compliance with all of the terms and conditions of this Agreement , the Subrecipient shall provide the services set forth in the Scope of Work , which provides a description of each activity , including the services to be performed , the person or entity providing the services , the estimated number for recipients of the services , and the manner and means of the services . The Subrecipient represents and warrants that the services to be provided to implement the Scope of Work shall be performed in a competent , professional , and satisfactory manner in accordance with the ESG . B . Statement of Work . 1 . The Subrecipient represents that it will negotiate a Statement of Work in accordance with the Work Plan , which shall include an accurate schedule for performance and completion of the work ( `` Statement of Work `` ) . 2 . The Statement of Work shall be in sufficient detail to provide a sound basis for Grantee to effectively monitor performance under this Agreement . 3 . The Statement of Work shall draw a nexus between the ESG and the Subrecipient 's work to prevent , prepare for , or respond to the COVI D-19 pandemic . 4 . The Subrecipient shall ensure that there are no duplications of benefits . A duplication of benefits exists when a program beneficiary receives assistance from multiple funding sources totaling an amount that exceeds the need for a particular funding need . C. Use of Funds . 1 . The Subrecipient agrees to use any ESG-CV Funds provided by the Grantee pursuant to the provisions of this Agreement , the Work Plan , the Statement of Work , and the Budget . The Subrecipient 's failure to perform as required may , in addition to other remedies set forth in this Agreement , result in the readjustment of the amount of ESG-CV Funds the Grantee is otherwise obligated to pay to the Subrecipient under this Agreement . 2 . The Subrecipient shall use any ESG-CV Funds to pay for necessary and reasonable costs to operate the ESG , including wages , administrative costs , employee benefits comparable to other similarly situated employees , and other allowable costs as described in the Budget . 3 . If the Subrecipient uses any ESG-CV Funds for the purpose of acquiring real property or to reduce the cost of financing of the acquisition of real property , there shall be no alteration of the use of the acquired real property and no additional encumbrances placed on such real property during the Term of this Agreement , without prior written consent of the Grantee , such consent not to be unreasonably withheld . 4 . The Subrecipient shall , upon receipt of ESG-CV Funds for the purpose of acquiring or improving real property , cause a Deed of Trust , secured by a Promissory Note , to be executed and recorded , in favor of the Grantee , for the amount of the ESG-CF Funds provided by the Grantee . 5 . If the Subrecipient uses ESG-CV Funds for the purpose of acquiring or improving real property , and further encumbers such real property without first giving notice to the Grantee and obtaining the Grantee 's written consent , such consent not to be unreasonably withheld , Subrecipient Agreement - 2 - CAO : 2/24/2021 such occurrence shall be cause for termination or revocation of this Agreement and reversion of the assets as described in this Agreement , or collection on any Promissory Note executed in favor of the Grantee . Ill. BUDGET A The Subrecipient shall adhere to the Budget specified in Exhibit B . 8 . The Subrecipient represents that the Budget includes only allowable costs and an accurate analysis of costs applicable to ESG-CV Funds pursuant to 24 C.F.R 576.100 , which includes requirements for compliance with the following in addition to other requirements as stated in 2 C.F.R . Part 200 , Subpart E ( Cost Principles ) . C. The Budget shall be in sufficient detail to provide a sound basis for the Grantee to effectively monitor performance under this Agreement . D. The Grantee may require a more detailed Budget breakdown than what is contained in Exhibit B , and the Subrecipient shall provide such supplementary Budget information in a timely fashion in the form and content prescribed by the Grantee . Any changes to the Budget may only be made by written amendment signed by both the Grantee and the Subrecipient IV . PAYMENT A The total amount of ESG-CV Funds to be paid by the Grantee under this Agreement shall not exceed $ 78,335 . B . Any payment of ESG-CV Funds shall be made in installments determined by the Grantee . Payment shall be made to the Subrecipient through the submission of monthly invoices , in a form prescribed by the Grantee , detailing such expenses . The Grantee shall pay such invoices within 30 days after receipt thereof , provided the Grantee is satisfied that such expenses have been incurred pursuant to and within the scope of this Agreement and that the Subrecipient is otherwise in compliance with the terms and conditions of this Agreement . C. Payments to the Subrecipient are contingent upon HUD 's delivery of payment to the Grantee . D. Payments to the Subrecipient may be contingent upon certification of the Subrecipient 's financial management system in accordance with the standards specified in 2 C.F.R . 200.302 . V. NOTICES . All notices required by this Agreement shall be in writing and delivered to the appropriate Party via U.S. mail ( postage prepaid ) , commercial courier , or personal delivery , and addressed as follows : If to the Grantee City of Escondido Housing & Neighborhood Services Division

###

