AGREEMENT
BY AND BETWEEN
THE CITY OF LEMON GROVE
AND
CONTRACTOR
THIS AGREEMENT is approved and effective upon the date of the last
signature, by and between the CITY OF LEMON GROVE1 a mlmicipal corporation (the
"CllY"), and Home Start, Incorporated, a professional services organization with
extensive experience addressing the conditions of homelessness by providing support
services aimed at strengthening communities in the San Diego County region (the
"CONTRACTOR").
RECITALS
WHEREAS, the CITY desires to employ a CONTRACTOR to provide
coordinated and targeted street based homeless outreach and support services
independent or in collaboration with the San Diego County Sheriffs Department, Lemon
Grove Substation.
WHEREAS, the CITY has determined that the CONTRACTOR is a nonprofit
organization and is qualified by experience and ability to perform the services
desired by the CITY, and the CONTRACTOR is willing to perform such services.
NOW, THEREFORE, THE PARTIES HERETO DO MUTUALLY AGREE
AS FOLLOWS:
1. ENGAGEMENT OF CONTRACTOR. The CITY hereby agrees to
engage the CONTRACTOR and the CONTRACTOR hereby agrees to perform the
services hereinafter set forth in accordance with all terms and conditions contained
herein.
The CONTRACTOR represents that all services required hereunder will
be perfom,ed directly by the CONTRACTOR. or under direct supeivision of the
CONTRACTOR.
2. SCOPE OF SERVICES. The CONTRACTOR will perform services
as set forth in Exhibit "A􀀘 (Attached).
The CITY may unilaterally, or upon request from the CONTRACTOR, from
time to time reduce or increase the Scope of Services to be performed by the
CONTRACTOR under this Agreement. Upon doing so, the CITY and the
CONTRACTOR agree to meet in good faith and confer for the purpose of negotiating a
corresponding reduction or increase in the compensation associated with said change
in services.
3. PROJECT COORDINATION AND SUPERVISION.
The Management Analy2t hereby is designated as the Project Coordinator
for the CITY and will monitor the progress and execution of this Agreement. The
CONTRACTOR shall assign a single Project Director to provide supervision and have
overall responsibility for the progress and execution of this Agreement for the
CONTRACTOR. Direc or o H is designated as the Project
Director for the CONTRACTOR.
4. COMPENSATION AND PAYMENT.' The compensation for the
CONTRACTOR shall be based on monthly billings covering actual work performed.
Billings shall include labor classifications, respective rates, hours worked and also
materials, if any. The total cost for all work described in · Exhibit "8" equals eight
thousand sixty three dollars and seventy two cents ($8,063.72). The total compensation
for the CONTRACTOR will not exceed thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) without prior
written authorization from the City Council. Monthly invoices will be processed for
payment and remitted within thirty (30) days from receipt of invoice, provided that work
is accomplished consistent with Exhibit "A" as determined by and in the sole discretion
of the CITY.
The CONTRACTOR shall maintain all books, documents, papers,
employee time sheets, accounting records, and other evidence pertaining to costs
incurred and shall make such materials available at its office at all reasonable times
during the term of this Agreement and for three (3) years from the date of final payment
under this Agreement, for inspection by the CITY and for furnishing of copies to the
CITY, if requested.
5. LENGTH OF AGREEMENT. The agreement is retroactive from
July 13, 2020, the date of the first homeless outreach patrol. The agreement will expire
once all funds have been expended or by January 20, 2022, whichever date comes first.
6. DISPOSITION AND OWNERSHIP OF DOCUMENTS. The
Memoranda, Reports, Maps, and other documents prepared by the CONTRACTOR for
this Project, whether pciper or electronic, shall become the property of the CITY for use
with respect to this Project, and shall be turned over to the CITY upon completion of the
Project, or any phase thereof, as contemplated by this Agreement.
Contemporaneously with the transfer of documents, the CONTRACTOR
hereby assigns to the CITY and CONTRACTOR thereby expressly waives and
disclaims, any copyright in, and the right to reproduce, all written material, drawings,
plans, specifications or other work prepared under this agreement, except upon the
CITY's prior authorization regarding reproduction, which authorization shall not be
unreasonably withheld. The CONTRACTOR shall, upon request of the CITY, execute
any further document(s) necessary to further effectuate this waiver and disclaimer.
The CONTRACTOR agrees that the CITY may use, reuse, alter,
reproduce, modify, assign, transfer, or in any other way, medium or method utilize the
2
CONTRACTOR's written work product for the CITY's purposes, and the
CONTRACTOR expressly waives and disclaims any residual rights granted to it by Civil
Code Sections 980 through 989 relating to intellectual property and artistic works.
Any modification or reuse by the CITY of documents, drawings or
specifications prepared by the CONTRACTOR shall relieve the CONTRACTOR from
liability under Section 14 but only with respect to the effect of the modification or reuse
by the CITY, or for any liability to the CITY should the documents be used by the CITY
for some project other than what was expressly agreed upon within the Scope of this
project, unless otherwise mutually agreed.
7. INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR. Both parties hereto in the
performance of this Agreement will be acting in an independent capacity and not as
agents, employees, partners or joint venturers with one another. Neither the
CONTRACTOR nor the CONTRACTOR'S employees are employees of the CITY and
are not entitled to any of the rights, benefits, or privileges of the CITY's employees,
including but not limited to retirement, medical, unemployment, or workers'
compensation insurance.
This Agreement contemplates the personal services of the
CONTRACTOR and the CONTRACTOR's employees, and it is recognized by the
parties that a substantial inducement to the CITY for entering into this Agreement was,
and is, the professional reputation and competence of the CONTRACTOR and its
employees. Neither this Agreement nor any interest herein may be assigned by the
CONTRACTOR without the prior written consent of the CITY. Nothing herein contained
is intended to prevent the CONTRACTOR from employing or hiring as many
employees, or subcontractors, as the CONTRACTOR may deem necessary for the
proper and efficient performance of this Agreement. All agreements by CONTRACTOR
with its subcontractor(s) shall require the subcontractor to adhere to the applicable
terms of this Agreement.
8. CONTROL. Neither the CITY nor its officers, agents or employees
shall have any control over the conduct of the CONTRACTOR or any of the
CONTRACTOR's employees except as herein set forth, and the CONTRACTOR
expressly agrees not to represent that the CONTRACTOR or the CONTRACTOR's
agents, servants, or employees are in any manner agents, servants or employees of the
CITY, it being understood that the CONTRACTOR, its agents, servants, and employees
are as to the CITY wholly independent contractors and that the CONTRACTOR's
obligations to the CITY are solely such as are prescribed by this Agreement.
9. COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAW. The CONTRACTOR, in
the perfonnance of the services to be provided herein, shall comply with all applicable
State and Federal statutes and regulations, and all applicable ordinances, rules and
regulations of the CITY OF LEMON GROVE, whether now in force or subsequently
enacted. The CONTRACTOR, and each of its subcontractors, shall obtain and maintain
a current CITY OF LEMON GROVE business license prior to and during performance of
any work pursuant to this Agreement.
3
10. ETC. The CONTRACTOR represents and
covenants that it has all licenses, permits, qualifications, and approvals of whatever
nature that are legally required to practice its profession. The CONTRACTOR
represents and covenants that the CONTRACTOR shall, at its sole cost and expense,
keep in effect at all times during the term of this Agreement, any license, permit, or
approval which is legally required for the CONTRACTOR to practice its profession.
1 1. STANDARD OF CARE.
A. The CONTRACTOR, in performing any services under this
Agreement, shall perform in a manner consistent with that level of care and skill
ordinarily exercised by members of the CONTRACTOR'S trade or profession currently
practicing under similar conditions and in similar locations. The CONTRACTOR shall
take all special precautions necessary to protect the CONTRACTOR's employees and
members of the public from risk of harm arising out of the nature of the work and/or the
conditions of the work site.
B. Unless disclosed in writing prior to the date of this
agreement, the CONTRACTOR warrants to the CITY that it is not now, nor has it for the
five (5) years preceding, been debarred by a governmental agency or involved in
debarment, arbitration or litigation proceedings concerning the CONTRACTOR's
professional performance or the furnishing of materials or services relating thereto.
C. The CONTRACTOR is responsible for identifying any unique
products, treatments, processes or materials whose availability is critical to the success
of the project the CONTRACTOR has been retained to perform, within the time
requirements of the CITY, or, when no time is specified, then within a commercially
reasonable time. Accordingly, unless the CONTRACTOR has notified the CITY
otherwise, the CONTRACTOR warrants that all products, materials, processes or
treatments identified in the project documents prepared for the CITY are reasonably
commercially available. Any failure by the CONTRACTOR to use due diligence under
this sub-paragraph will render the CONTRACTOR liable to the CITY for any increased
costs that result from the CITY's later inability to obtain the specified items or any
reasonable substitute within a price range that allows for project completion in the time
frame specified or, when not specified, then within a commercially reasonable time.
12. NON-DISCRIMINATION PROVISIONS. The CONTRACTOR shall
not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of age,
race, color, ancestry, religion, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, national origin,
physical handicap, or medical condition. The CONTRACTOR will take positive action to
insure that applicants are employed without regard to their age, race, color, ancestry,
religion, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, national origin, physical handicap, or
medical condition. Such action shall include but not be limited to the following:
employment, upgrading, demotion, transfer, recruitment or recruitment advertising,
layoff or termination, rates of pay or other forms of compensation, and selection for
training, including apprenticeship. The CONTRACTOR agrees to post in conspicuous
places available to employees and applicants for employment any notices provided by
the CITY setting forth the provisions of this non-discrimination clause.
4
13. CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION. The CITY may from time to time
communicate to the CONTRACTOR certain confidential information to enable the
CONTRACTOR to effectively perform the services to be provided herein. The
CONTRACTOR shall treat all such information as confidential and shall not disclose any
part thereof without the prior written consent of the CITY. The CONTRACTOR shall
limit the use and circulation of such information, even within its own organization, to the
extent necessary to perform the services to be provided herein. The foregoing
obligation of this Section 13, however, shall not apply to any part of the information that
(i) has been disclosed in publicly available sources of information; (ii) is, through no fault
of the CONTRACTOR, hereafter disclosed in publicly available sources of information;
(iii) is already in the possession of the CONTRACTOR without any obligation of
confidentiality; (iv) has been or is hereafter rightfully disclosed to the CONTRACTOR by
a third party, but only to the extent that the use or disclosure thereof has been or is
rightfully authorized by that third party; or (v) is disclosed according to law or court
order.
The CONTRACTOR shall not disclose any reports, recommendations,
conclusions or other results of the services or the existence of the subject matter of this
Agreement without the prior written consent of the CITY. In its performance hereunder,
the CONTRACTOR shall comply with all legal obligations it may now or hereafter have
respecting the information or other property of any other person, firm or corporation.
CONTRACTOR shall be liable to CITY for any damages caused by breach
of this condition, pursuant to the provisions of Section 14.
14. INDEMNIFICATION AND HOLD HARMLESS. The CONTRACTOR
shall indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the CITY, and its officers, officials, agents
and employees from any and all claims, demands, costs or liability that arise out of,
pertain to, or relate to the negligence, recklessness, or willful misconduct of
CONSULTANT, its employees, agents, and subcontractors in the performance of
services under this Agreement. CONTRACTOR's duty to indemQify under this section
shall not include liability for damages for death or bodily injury to persons, injury to
property, or other loss, damage or expense arising from the sole negligence or willful
misconduct by the CITY or its elected officials, officers, agents, and employees.
CONTRACTOR's indemnification obligations shall not be limited by the insurance
provisions of this Agreement. The CITY AND CONTRACTOR expressly agree that any
payment, attorney's fees, costs or expense CITY incurs or makes to or on behalf of an
injured employee under the CITY 's self-administered workers' compensation is
included as a loss, expense, or cost for the purposes of this section, and that this
section will survive the expiration or early termination of this Agreement.
15. WORKERS' COMPENSATION. The CONTRACTOR shall comply
with all of the provisions of the Workers' Compensation Insurance and Safety Acts of
the State of California, the applicable provisions of Division 4 and 5 of the California
Government Code and all amendments thereto; and all similar state or Federal acts or
laws applicable; and shall indemnify, and hold harmless the CITY and its officers, and
employees from and against all claims, demands, payments, suits, actions, proceedings
and judgments of every nature and description, including reasonable attorney's fees
5
and defense costs presented, brought or recovered against the CITY or its officers,
employees, or volunteers, for or on account of any liability under any of said acts which
may be incurred by reason of any work to be performed by the CONTRACTOR under
this Agreement.
16. INSURANCE. The CONTRACTOR, at its sole cost and expense,
shall purchase and maintain, and shall require its subcontractors, when applicable, to
purchase and maintain throughout the term of this agreement, the following insurance
policies:
t8J A. If checked, Professional Liability Insurance (errors and omissions)
with minimum limits of $1,000,000 per occurrence.
B. Automobile insurance covering all bodily injury and property
damage incurred during the performance of this Agreement, with a minimum coverage
of $1,000,000 combined single limit per accident. Such automobile insurance shall
include non-owned vehicles.
C. Comprehensive general liability insurance, with minimum limits of
$1,000,000 combined single limit per occurrence and $2 million aggregate limit,
covering all bodily injury and property damage arising out of its operation under this
Agreement.
employees.
D. Workers' compensation insurance covering all of CONTRACTOR's
E. The aforesaid policies shall constitute primary insurance as to the
CITY, its officers, employees, and volunteers, so that any other policies held by the
CITY shall not contribute to any loss under said insurance. Said policies shall provide
for thirty (30) days prior written notice to the CITY of cancellation or material change.
F. Said policies, except for the professional liability and worker's
compensation policies, shall name the CITY and its officers, agents and employees as
additional insureds.
G. If required insurance coverage is provided on a "claims made"
rather than "occurrence" form, the CONTRACTOR shall maintain such insurance
coverage for three years after expiration of the term (and any extensions) of this Agreement.
ment.
H. Any aggregate insurance limits must apply solely to this Agree-
I. Insurance shall be written with only California admitted companies
which hold a current policy holder's alphabetic and financial size category rating of not
less than A VIII according to the current Best's Key Rating Guide, or a company equal
financial stability that is approved by the CITY.
6
J. This Agreement shall not take effect until certificate(s) or other
sufficient proof that these insurance provisions have been complied with, are filed with
and approved by the CITY. if the CONTRACTOR does not keep all of such insurance
policies in full force and effect at all times during the terms of this Agreement, the CITY
may elect to treat the failure to maintain the requisite insurance as a breach of this
Agreement and terminate the Agreement as provided herein.
17. LEGAL FEES. If any party brings a suit or action against the other
party arising from any breach of any of the covenants or agreements or any
inaccuracies in any of the representations and warranties on the part of the other party
arising out of this Agreement, then in that event, the prevailing party in such action or
dispute, whether by final judgment or out-of-court settlement, shall be entitled to have
and recover of and from the other party all reasonable costs and expenses of suit,
including reasonable attorneys' fees.
For purposes of determining who is to be considered the prevailing party,
it is stipulated that attorney's fees incurred in the prosecution or defense of the action or
suit shall not be considered in determining the amount of the judgment or award.
Attorney's fees to the prevailing party if other than the CITY shall, in addition, be limited
to the amount of attorney's fees incurred by the CITY in its prosecution or defense of
the action, irrespective of the actual amount of attorney's fees incurred by the prevailing
party.
18. MEDIATION/ARBITRATION. If a dispute arises out of or relates
to thi$ Agreement, or the breach thereof, the parties agree first to try, in good faith, to
settle the dispute by mutual negotiation between the principles, and failing that through
nonbinding mediation in San Diego, California, in accordance with the Commercial
Mediation Rules of the American Arbitration Association (the "AAA"). The costs of
mediation shall be borne equally by the parties.
19. TERMINATION. A. This Agreement may be terminated with or
without cause by the CITY. Termination without cause shall be effective only upon 30-
day's written notice to the CONTRACTOR. During said 30-day period the
CONTRACTOR shall perform all services in accordance with this Agreement. The
Contractor may terminate this agreement upon thirty (30) days prior notice in the event
of a continuing and material breach by the City of its obligations under this Agreement
including but not limited to payment of invoices.
B. This Agreement may also be terminated immediately by the CITY
for cause in the event of a material breach of this Agreement that is not cured to the
City's satisfaction within a ten (10) day prior cure period, or material misrepresentation
by the CONTRACTOR in connection with the formation of this Agreement or the
performance of services, or the failure to perform services as directed by the CITY.
C. Termination with or without cause shall be effected by delivery of
written Notice of Termination to the CONTRACTOR as provided for herein.
D. In the event of termination, all finished or unfinished Memoranda
Reports, Maps, Drawings, Plans, Specifications and other documents prepared by the
CONTRACTOR, whether paper or electronic, shall immediately become the property of
7
and be delivered to the CITY, and the CONTRACTOR shall be entitled to receive just
and equitable compensation for any work satisfactorily completed on such documents
and other materials up to the effective date of the Notice of Termination, not to exceed
the amounts payable hereunder, and less any damages caused the CITY by the
CONTRACTOR's breach, if any. Thereafter, ownership of said written material shall
vest in the CITY all rights set forth in Section 6.
E. The CITY further reserves the right to immediately terminate this
Agreement upon: ( 1) the filing of a petition in bankruptcy affecting the CONTRACTOR;
(2) a reorganization of the CONTRACTOR for the benefit of creditors; or (3) a business
reorganization, change in business name or change in business status of the
CONTRACTOR.
20. NOTICES. All notices or other communications required or
permitted hereunder shall be in writing, and shall be personally delivered; or sent by
overnight mail (Federal Express or the like); or sent by registered or certified mail,
postage prepaid, return receipt requested; or sent by ordinary mail, postage prepaid; or
telegraphed or cabled; or delivered or sent by telex, telecopy, facsimile or fax; and shall
be deemed received upon the earlier of (i) if personally delivered, the date of delivery to
the address of the person to -receive such notice, (ii) if sent by overnight mail, the
business day following its deposit in such overnight mail facility, (iii) if mailed by
registered, certified or ordinary mail, five (5) days (ten (10) days if the address is outside
the State of California) after the date of deposit in a post office, mailbox, mail chute, or
other like facility regularly maintained by the United States Postal Service, (iv) if given
by telegraph or cable, when delivered to the telegraph company with charges prepaid,
or (v) if given by telex, telecopy, facsimile or fax, when sent. Any notice, request,
demand, direction or other communication delivered or sent as specified above shall be
directed to the following persons:
To the CITY: Lydia Romero, City Manager
CITY OF LEMON GROVE
3232 Main Street
Lemon Grove, CA 91945-1701
To the CONTRACTOR: Lauren Pollick-Presson
Deputy Director of Housing Services
Home Start, Incorporated
5005 Texas Street, Suite 203
San Diego, CA 92108
Notice of change of address shall be given by written notice in the manner
specified in this Section. Rejection or other refusal to accept or the inability to deliver
because of changed address of which no notice was given shall be deemed to
constitute receipt of the notice, demand, request or communication sent. Any notice,
request, demand, direction or other communication sent by cable, telex, telecopy,
facsimile or fax must be confirmed within forty-eight (48) hours by letter mailed or
delivered as specified in this Section.
8
2 1 . CONFLICT OF INTEREST AND POLITICAL REFORM ACT
OBLIGATIONS. During the term of this Agreement, the CONTRACTOR shall not
perform services of any kind for any person or entity whose i nterests confli ct in any way
with those of the C I TY OF LEMON G ROVE. The CONTRACTOR also a g rees not to
specify any prod u ct, treatment, process or materia l for the p roject in which the
CONTRACTOR has a material financial i nterest, either d i rect or i nd i rect, without first
n otifying the C ITY of that fact. The CONTRACTO R shall at a l l times comply with the
terms of the Political Reform Act and the Lemon G rove Conflict of I nterest Code. The
CONTRACTOR shall immedi ately d isqu a l ify itself and shall not use its official position to
i nfl uence in any way any matter com i ng before the CITY in which the CONTRACTOR
has a financial interest as defined in Government Code Section 87 1 03 . The
CONTRACTOR rep resents that it has no knowledge of any fin ancial i nterests that would
req u i re it to d isq u a l ify itself from any m atter o n which it mig ht perform services for the
C I TY .
0 I f checked , the CONTRACTOR shall comply with a l l o f t h e reporting
req u i rements of the Political Reform Act and the CITY O F LEMON GROVE Conflict of
I nterest Cod e . S pecifically, the CONTRACTOR shall:
1 . G o to www.f􀄼
2 . Down load the Form 700: Statement of Economic I nterests
3. Completely fil l out the form
4. S u bm it the form to the C ity of Lemon G rove with the sig ned contracts.
The CONTRACTO R shall be strictly liable to the C I TY for a l l damages,
costs or expenses the C ITY may suffer by v i rtue of any violation of this Parag raph 21 by
the C ONTRACTOR.
22 . MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
A. Computation of Time Periods. If any date or time period provided
for in this Ag reement is or ends on a Satu rd ay , S unday or fede ra l , state or leg a l holiday,
then such d ate sha l l a utomatica lly be extended until 5:00 p . m . Pacific Time of the next
day wh ich is not a S aturday, S unday or federa l , state or leg a l holiday .
B . Counterparts. This Ag reement may be executed i n m u ltiple
cou nterpa rts, each of wh ich shall be deemed a n original, b ut all of wh ich , together, shall
constitute but one and the same instrument.
C. Captions. Any captions to, or head ings of, the sections or
subsections of this Agreement a re solely for the conven ience of the parties hereto, a re
not a p a rt of this Ag reement, and shall n ot be used for the i nterpretation or
determ i natio n of the validity of th is Ag reement or any provision hereof.
9
D. No Obligations to Third Parties. Except as otherwise expressly
provided herein, the execution and delivery of this Agreement shall not be deemed to
confer any rights upon, or obligate any of the parties hereto, to any person or entity
other than the parties hereto.
E. Exhibits and Schedules. The Exhibits and Schedules attached
hereto are hereby incorporated herein by this reference for all purposes.
F. Amendment to this Agreement. The terms of this Agreement may
not be modified or amended except by an instrument in writing executed by each of the
parties hereto.
G. Waiver. The waiver or failure to enforce any provision of this
Agreement shall not operate as a waiver of any future breach of any such provision or
any other provision hereof.
H. Applicable Law. This Agreement shall be governed by and
construed in accordance with the laws of the State of California.
I. Entire Agreement. This Agreement supersedes any prior agreements,
negotiations and communications, oral or written, and contains the entire
agreement between the parties as to the subject matter hereof. No subsequent
agreement, representation, or promise made by either party hereto, or by or to an
employee, officer, agent or representative of any party hereto shall be of any effect
unless it is in writing and executed by the party to be bound thereby.
J . Successors and Assigns. This Agreement shall be binding upon
and shall inure to the benefit of the successors and assigns of the parties hereto.
K. Construction. The parties acknowledge and agree that (i) each
party is of equal bargaining strength, (ii) each party has actively participated in the
drafting, preparation and negotiation of this Agreement, (iii) each such party has
consulted with or has had the opportunity to consult with its own, independent counsel
and such other professional advisors as such party has deemed appropriate, relative to
any and all matters contemplated under this Agreement, (iv) each party and such
party's counsel and advisors have reviewed this Agreement, (v) each party has agreed
to enter into this Agreement following such review and the rendering of such advice,
and (vi) any rule or construction to the effect that ambiguities are to be resolved against
the· drafting party shall not apply in the interpretation of this Agreement, or any portions
hereof, or any amendments hereto.
1 0
I N WITNESS WH EREOF, the parties hereto have executed this
Agreement on the d ate a nd year first above writte n .
CITY OF LEMON GROVE CONTRACTOR
(Corporation - signatures of two corporate officers)
(Partnership - one signature)
(Sole proprietorship - one signature)
\/
By. i.. /), • • i .: , , ,,,.; uh􀀃 -· . • 􀀛
,. ..._ , ...... ((􀀜· ·-·") t·,:.,... " ···􀀝􀀞-.
Lau ra Tancredi􀄽 aese
C h ief Executive Officer
(Title)
Cj / 2 J / 2 0
(Date)
(Name 2)
(Title)
(Date)
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
By: ---------Kristen
Steinke
C ity Attorney
(Title)
(Date)
1 1
By : -----------(
Name)
(Title)
(Date)
Exhibit A
IN WITN ESS WH EREOF, the parties hereto have executed this
Ag reement on the date and year first abo11e written .
CITY OF LEMON GROVE
av
(Date)
CONTRACTOR
•Corpor·a'10,, - .s1gr1atures o.' two corporate officers)
(Pal't11ersh1p - ,Jm.> s19nafore,I
(Sole proprietorship - one !igna ture)
By: .. . J􀂟· .YL.1 • ....1 ... J 􀀏. ,.fo P::􀂠.) .•
Laura Tancredi-Baese
Chief Executive Officer
(Name 2)
(Title)
(Date)
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
By:
(Title)
(Da te)
11
Exhibit A
SCOPE OF SERVICES
The CONTRACTOR shall perform targeted street-based homeless outreach and
provide support services independent or in collaboration with the San Diego County
Sheriff's Department, Lemon Grove Substation to the City of Lemon Grove.
In collaboration shall mean that the CONTRACTOR, Home Start, Inc. will partner with
the San Diego County Sheriffs Department, Lemon Grove Substation to form a fourperson
team comprised of two homeless outreach specialists and two deputies that will
assist individuals experiencing homelessness by providing emergency hygiene kits and
food packs, providing transportation to a shelter. or medical agency, and/or facilitating
support services. Independent shall mean that Home Start, Inc. will provide homeless
outreach without the collaboration to assist individuals experiencing homelessness by
providing emergency hygiene kits and food packs, providing transportation to a shelter
or medical agency, and/or facilitating support services.
The CITY shall provide the CONTRACTOR emergency hygiene kits and food packs to
distribute to individuals experiencing homelessness. Distribution of Emergency hygiene
kits shall include, but will not be limited to, the following items: face coverings, gloves,
sanitizer, soap, shampoo, toothbrush and toothpaste, socks, and a razor and shaving
cream. Distribution of food packs can include, but will not be limited to, the following
items: water, juice boxes, fruit snacks, crackers, pudding cups, and cookie bags.
The CONTRACTOR shall coordinate transportation to a shelter or hospital for
individuals that require this assistance.
The CONTRACTOR shall provide the CITY a synopsis associated with the homeless
outreach and support services that are provided on a monthly basis or when requested.
The CONTRACTOR shall continue to perform homeless outreach and support services
until all funds have been exhausted or January 20, 2022, whichever date comes first.
The CITY will provide compensation and payment to the CONTRACTOR for the costs
associated with the performance of the services that are outlined below.
Budget Item Rate Hours Worked/ Total Coats
Quantity
Homeless Outreach Specialist $28. 1 3 1 22 $3,431 . 86
(including Indirect Costs)
Homeless Outreach Specialist $28. 1 3 1 22 $3,431 . 86
(including I ndirect Costs)
Ride Share To Shelter for $20 60 $ 1 ,200
Homeless
$8,063.72
1 2