The Valley of Opportunity
􀁾• •- ' 􀁿•
C'o '\-0,
:,,Po.rate􀀈
August 22, 2019
Mr. Harold H. Brown
Chief Executive Officer
East County Transitional Living Center, Inc.
1527 East Main Street
El Cajon, CA 92021
USPS TRAv,,;.-lG If. 9489 1090 0027 6000 4482 10
INSURANCE <= $500: FOR TRACKING GO TO USPS.COM
Community Development
RE: FY 2019-20 Agreement for Use of CDBG Funds
CFDA No.: 14.218 (Community Development Block Grant)
Dear Pastor Brown:
Enclosed you will find a fully executed copy of East County Transitional Living
Center's agreement for use of CDBG funds for the upcoming program year 2019-
2020. The City's Annual Action Plan has not yet been approved by HUD and
grant agreements with HUD have not yet been executed. However, HUD has
advised us that subrecipients may begin to incur program costs as of July 1,
2019, but the City will be required to wait until we have HUD approval and
executed grant agreements in place before we may draw down HUD funds to
reimburse your agency.
In the meantime, as all other conditions of East County Transitional Living
Center's grant for FY 2019-2020 appear to have been met, including completion
of the environmental review for your project, you may begin to obligate
expenditures against these funds as of July 1, 2019.
If you have any questions feel free to contact me at (619) 441-1786. I look
forward to working with you again this year.
Sincerely,
ie van Ravesteyn
ousing Manager
Encl.
City of El Cajon • 200 Civic Center Way• El Cajon, CA 92020
Planning ( 619) 441-1742 • Building and Fire Safety (619) 441-1726 • Housing (619) 441-1710
www.cityofelcajon.us
AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE CITY OF EL CAJON AND
East County Transitional Living Center, Inc.
THIS AGREEMENT is made and entered into this /5f day of JU/􀀄 , 2019, by and
between the CITY OF EL CAJON, a municipal corporation, hereinafter referred tos "City," and East County
Transitional Living Center, Inc., a nonprofit organization under the laws of the State of California, hereinafter
referred to as "Subrecipient";
WHEREAS, there exists a need within the City of El Cajon to provide a variety of services, including
housing, recreational, educational, and child care services and developmental programs; and
WHEREAS, the Subrecipient has expressed a desire and has the expertise and experience to operate
the program entitled "Emergency Shelter Program for Homeless" in El Cajon; and
WHEREAS, the City has entered into a contract with the United States of America through its Department
of Housing and Urban Development, hereinafter called HUD, to execute the City's Community Development Block
Grant, hereinafter called CDBG, program under the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as
amended, hereinafter called the "Act".
1.
2.
NOW, THEREFORE, IT IS HEREBY MUTUALLY AGREED by and between the parties hereto as follows:
City Review:
The City reserves the right to review and approve actions and decisions taken by the Subrecipient with
respect to the operation of the Emergency Shelter Program for Homeless for compliance with all
applicable regulations.
Subrecipient Status:
The City recognizes the Subrecipient as an independent nonprofit organization and agrees to cooperate
in protecting its image as a politically neutral organization.
3. Service Area:
The Service area is City-wide in the City of El Cajon.
4. Scope of Services:
The Subrecipient shall perform all services described in the project description and Scope of Work and
Budget set forth as Exhibit "A" to this Agreement, a copy of which is attached hereto and incorporated
herein by this reference.
5. Time of Performance:
6.
7,
Said services of the Subrecipient are to commence no sooner than July 1, 2019, and shall be completed
no later than June 30, 2020.
Compensation and Method of Payment:
The City shall reimburse the Subrecipient for allowable costs incurred under the scope of the Agreement
and applicable Federal regulations, which have not been paid for or reimbursed in any other manner by
any other Agency or private source of funding. The total of all reimbursements shall not exceed
One Hundred Thousand and no/100s dollars ($100,000.00).
Compliance with Laws and Assurances:
The Subrecipient hereby assures and certifies that it has complied with and will continue to comply with
the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, hereinafter called the Act, and all current and
future applicable federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, regulations, policies, guidelines, and
requirements as they relate to acceptance and use of Federal funds for this federally assisted program.
This Agreement is subject to all such laws, ordinances, regulations, policies, guidelines, and requirements
including without limitation, the Act, Title 24, Code of Federal Regulations, Parts 84, 85 and 200; Title 24,
Code of Federal Regulations, Part 570; Title 29 Code of Federal Regulations, Parts 3 and 5; Title 24 Code
of Federal Regulations Part 70; Public Law 87-581; and applicable Circulars of the U.S. Office of
Management Budget, hereinafter called 0MB, including without limitation, A-87, A-110, A-122, A-128,
and A-133.
1
8. Records Retention:
9.
10.
The Subrecipient shall maintain and retain all financial records, supporting documents, statistical records
and all other records pertaining to the use of the funds provided under this Agreement for a period of four
(4) years at a minimum, and in the event of litigation, claim or audit, the records shall be retained until all
litigation, claims, and audit findings involving the records have been fully resolved. Records for none(
4x)p yeenadrasb aleft eprr othpee rftiyn aalc dqiusipreods iwtioitnh oFfe sduecrha l pfuronpdesr tpyr.o vided under this Agreement shall be retained for four
Monitoring:
The City will conduct periodic program monitoring reviews. These reviews will focus on the extent to which
the planned program has been implemented, measurable goals achieved, effectiveness of program
management, and impact of the program. Authorized representatives of the City and HUD shall have the
right of access to all activities and facilities operated by the Subrecipient under this Agreement. Facilities
include all files, records, and other documents related to the performance of this Agreement. Activities
include attendance at staff, board of directors, advisory committee, and advisory board meetings and
inspection by City and HUD representatives, and to ensure that its employees and board members furnish
such information, as in the judgment of City and HUD representatives, may be relevant to the question of
compliance with contractual conditions and HUD directives, or the effectiveness, legality and
achievements of the program.
Program Reporting:
The Subrecipient agrees to prepare and submit financial, program progress, evaluations, and other
reports as ·required by HUD or the City. The Subrecipient shall maintain such program, property,
personnel, financial and other records and accounts as are considered necessary by HUD or the City to
assure proper accounting for all Contract funds. Sub-recipient shall submit all financial requirements in
Exhibit "B" (Request for Payment forms). All of the Subrecipient's records, with the exception of
confidential client information, shall be made available to representatives of the City and the appropriate
Federal agencies. The Subrecipient is required to submit data necessary to complete the Annual
Subrecipient Performance Report and other federal documents in accordance with HUD regulations and
in the format and at the time designated by the City. Subrecipient shall submit a Periodic Performance
Report (Exhibit "C") for the reporting period (may be either monthly or quarterly, as agreed to with the
City at time of contract execution) by the 10th day of the month following the reporting period. The reports
shall include the following information:
A. Number of individual clients served (individual client may be a person or a household)
B. Race of clients served
C. Ethnicity of clients served (Hispanic, yes or no - a person may be of any race and be Hispanic)
D. Number of disabled clients served (as defined by the Social Security Administrative Guidelines)
E. Whether or not the head of the household is female
F. Number of clients who are low income (per HUD guidelines)
G. Whether or not the client is an El Cajon resident.
H. Number of new clients assisted.
In addition, a brief narrative must accompany the report (Exhibit "C-2"). The narrative should include
(but is not limited to) the following:
A. Outreach methods used;
B. Number and disposition of complaints received; and
C. Progress made toward goals as evidenced in Exhibit "A", or an explanation of lack thereof.
D. Any other accomplishments or problems/concerns the Agency wishes to report.
11. Accounting:
The Subrecipient must establish and maintain on a current basis, an adequate accrual and accounting
system in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and standards. The City, the Federal
Granter Agency, the Comptroller General of the United States, or any of their duly-authorized
representatives, shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of the Subrecipient
2
which directly pertain to the above project for the purpose of audit, examination, excerpts and
transcriptions.
12. Audits:
13.
14.
The Subrecipient is required to arrange for an independent financial and compliance audit annually for
each fiscal year Federal funds are received under this contract. Audits must be in compliance with 0MB
Circular A-133. (Exhibit "F") An audit may be conducted by Federal, State, or local funding source
agencies as part of the City's audit responsibilities. The Subrecipient shall forward a copy of the
independent audit to the City for review within thirty (30) days of its completion. Within thirty (30)
days of the submittal of said audit report, the Subrecipient shall provide a written response to all conditions
or findings reported in said audit report. The response must examine each condition or finding and explain
a proposed resolution, including a schedule for correcting any deficiency. All correction actions related to
conditions or findings shall take place within six (6) months after receipt of the audit report.
The City's authorized representatives shall at all times, have access for the purpose of audit or inspection,
to any and all books, documents, papers, records, property and premises of the Subrecipient.
Subrecipient staff will cooperate fully with authorized auditors when they conduct audits and examinations
of the Subrecipient's program. If indications of misappropriation or misapplication of the funds of this
Agreement cause the City to require a special audit, the cost of the audit will be encumbered and deducted
from the Subrecipient's CDBG award. Should the special audit confirm misappropriation or misapplication
of funds, the Subrecipient shall reimburse the City the amount of the misapplication or misappropriation.
In the event the City uses the judicial system to recover misappropriated or misapplied funds, the
Subrecipient shall reimburse the City for legal fees and court costs in addition to awards.
Beneficiary Qualification:
The Subrecipient agrees to guarantee that at least fifty-one percent (51 %) of the beneficiaries of the
program identified in Exhibit "A," Scope of Work and Budget, are low and moderate income persons or
households. Under the CDBG regulations, the following clienteles are presumed to be low and moderate
income persons and can qualify for service regardless of income: abused children, elderly persons,
battered spouses, homeless persons, disabled persons, illiterate persons, and migrant farm workers.
Beneficiaries qualifying on the basis of income shall have an annual income equal to or less than the HUD
Section 8 (of the United States Housing Act of 1937) Income Limits. HUD Section 8 Income Limits for the
San Diego MSA, define the maximum family income for low and moderate income households. The
Subrecipient is responsible for obtaining the current applicable HUD Section 8 Income Limits for each
year of the Agreement term identified in Paragraph 6, Time of Performance. The Subrecipient shall retain
these forms for three (3) years after conclusion of the Agreement.
Assignment:
This Agreement is not assignable by the Subrecipient without the express prior written consent of the City
Council. Consent shall be given at the sole discretion of the City Council. Any attempt by the Subrecipient
to assign any performance of the terms of this Agreement shall be null and void and shall constitute a
material breach of this Agreement upon which the City may, among other remedies, and without limitation,
cancel, terminate, or suspend this Agreement.
15. Termination and Termination Costs:
This Agreement may be terminated in whole or in part at any time by either party upon giving thirty (30)
days written notice to the other party. Agreement must be reached by both parties as to reasons and
conditions for termination in compliance with the provisions of Title 24 Code of Federal Regulations Part
85.44, Termination for Convenience. The City Manager is hereby empowered to give said notice subject
to ratification by the City Council.
The City may immediately terminate this Agreement upon the termination, suspension, discontinuation,
or substantial reduction in CDBG funding for the Contract activity or if for any reason the timely completion
of the work under this Agreement is rendered improbable, infeasible, or impossible. If the Subrecipient
materially fails to comply with any term of this Agreement, the City may take one of more of the actions
provided under 24 CFR Part 85.43, Enforcement, which includes temporarily withholding cash,
disallowing, noncompliance costs, wholly or partially terminating the award, withholding future awards,
and other remedies that are legally available. In such event, the Subrecipient shall be compensated for
all services rendered and all necessarily incurred costs performed in good faith in accordance with the
terms of this Agreement that have been previously reimbursed, to the date of said termination to the extent
that CDBG funds are available from HUD.
3
16. Program Income:
A Program income defined as that money generated from the CDBG funds received herein, and
shall be retained by the Subrecipient.
B. The Subrecipient shall utilize the program income in accordance with Exhibit "A" and all
provisions of this Agreement shall apply to the disposition of program income.
C. Disposition of program income shall be done in accordance with Paragraph 18 of this Agreement.
17. Reversion of Assets:
18.
Upon the expiration or termination of this Agreement, for any reason whatsoever, the Subrecipient shall
forthwith transfer to the City, any CDBG funds on hand at the time of such expiration or termination and
any accounts receivable attributable to the use of CDBG funds including without limitation, program
income. Further, any real property under the control of the Subrecipient that was acquired or improved in
whole or in part with CDBG funds in excess of $25,000 shall be: (a) used to meet one of the national
objectives set forth in Title 24 CFR 570.208, or any successor statute, until five (5) years after the
expiration or termination of the Agreement, or for such longer period of time as determined to be
appropriate by the City at its sole discretion; or (b) disposed of in a manner that results in the City's being
reimbursed in the amount of the current fair market value of real property less any portion of the value
attributable to expenditures of non-CDBG funds for acquisition of, or improvement to such real property.
Independent Contractor:
The parties hereto in the performance of this Agreement will be acting in an independent capacity and not
as agents, employees, partners, joint venturers, or associates of one another. The employees or agents
of one party shall not be deemed or construed to be the agent or employees of the other party for any
purpose whatsoever.
19. Insurance:
The Subrecipient shall neither commence work under this Agreement until it has obtained all insurance
required hereunder in a company or companies acceptable to the City nor shall the Subrecipient allow
any subcontractor to commence work on a subcontract until all insurance required of the subcontractor
has been obtained.
The Subrecipient shall agree to provide an acceptable certificate of insurance and endorsements
evidencing the coverage as specified in El Cajon City Council Policy D-3, Insurance Requirements, which
is attached hereto as Exhibit "D" and made a part of this Agreement. All insurance policies shall be
subject to approval by CITY as to form and content.
Subrecipient shall furnish properly executed certificates of insurance to CITY prior to commencement of
seNices under this Agreement. Such certificate shall:
A Clearly evidence all coverages required above, including specific evidence of a separate
endorsement naming CITY and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and employees
as additionally insureds;
B. Indicate whether coverage provided is on claims-made or occurrence basis;
C. Provide that such insurance shall not be materially changed, terminated, or allowed to expire
except on thirty (30) days prior written notice, via first class mail to CITY; and
D. Subrecipient agrees to provide CITY with copies of all required policies upon request.
Subrecipient shall also maintain Worker's Compensation Insurance (Exhibit "G") with statutory limits,
and employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than $2,000,000 per accident.
20. No Benefit to Arise to Local Employee:
No member, officer, or employee of the City, or its designees or agents, no member of the governing body
of the City, and no other public official who exercises any functions or responsibilities with respect to the
program during his or her tenure or for one year thereafter, shall have any interest, direct or indirect, in
this Agreement or in any contract or subcontract, or the proceeds thereof, for work to be performed in
connection with the program assisted under this Agreement.
21. Certification Regarding Lobbying:
The Subrecipient certifies to the best of their knowledge and belief, that:
4
A No Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid, by or on behalf of the undersigned,
to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any agency, a
Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress in connection with the awarding of any
Federal contract, the making of any cooperative agreement, and the extension, continuation,
renewal, amendment, or modification of any Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative
agreement.
B. If any funds other than Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid to any person
for influencing or attempting to influence any officer or employee of any agency, a Member of
Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or any employee of a Member of Congress in
connection with this Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement, the undersigned
shall complete and submit Standard Form-LLL, "Disclosure Form to Report Lobbying.'' in
accordance with its instructions.
C. The Subrecipient shall require that the language of this certification be included in the award
documents for all sub-awards at all tiers (including subcontractors, sub-grantees, and contracts
under grants, loans, and cooperative agreements), and that all Subrecipients shall certify and
disclose accordingly.
22. Conflict of Interest:
A Subrecipient covenants that neither it, nor any officer or principal of its firm, has or shall acquire
any interest, directly or indirectly, which would conflict in any manner with the interests of City or
which would in any way hinder Subrecipient's performance of services under this Agreement
Subrecipient further covenants that in the performance of this Agreement, no person having any
such interest shall be employed by it as an officer, employee, agent or subcontractor without the
express written consent of the City Manager. Subrecipient agrees to at all times avoid conflicts of
interest or the appearance of any conflicts of interest with the interests of City in the performance
of this Agreement (also see Exhibit "E").
B. City understands and acknowledges that Subrecipient is, as of the date of execution of this
Agreement, independently involved in the performance of non-related services for other
governmental agencies and private parties. Subrecipient is unaware of any stated position of City
relative to such projects. Any future position of City on such projects shall not be considered a
conflict of interest for purposes of this section.
23. Use of Funds for Entertainment or Gifts:
24.
The Subrecipient certifies and agrees that it will not use funds provided through this Agreement to pay for
entertainment or gifts.
Joint Funding:
For programs in which there are sources of funds in addition to CDBG funds, the Subrecipient shall
provide proof of such funding. The City shall not pay for any services provided by the Subrecipient which
are funded by other sources. All restrictions and/or requirements provided in this Agreement relative to
accounting, budgeting, and reporting applies to the total program regardless of funding sources.
25. Changes in Grant Allocation:
26.
The City reserves the right to reduce the grant allocation when the City's fiscal monitoring indicates that
the Subrecipient's rate of expenditure will result in unspent funds at the end of the program year. Changes
in the grant allocation will be done after consultation with the Subrecipient and approval by the City
Council. Such changes shall be incorporated into this Agreement by written amendments.
Fiscal Limitations:
The United States of America through HUD may in the future place programmatic or fiscal limitation(s) on
CDBG funds not presently anticipated. Accordingly, the City reserves the right to revise this Agreement
in order to comply with actions affecting HUD program funding. In the event of funding reduction, the City
may reduce the budget of the Agreement as a whole or as to cost category, and may at its sole discretion,
limit the Subrecipient's authority to commit and spend funds, and may restrict the Subrecipient's use of
both its uncommitted and unspent funds. Where HUD had directed or requested the City to implement a
reduction in funding, with respect to funding for this Agreement, the City Manager or his/her designee
may act for the City in implementing and effecting such a reduction in revising the Agreement for such
purpose. The City Manager or his/her designee may act for the City in suspending the operation of the
5
Agreement for up to sixty (60) days, upon three (3) days written notice to the Subrecipient of his/her
intention to so act. In no event, however, shall any revision made by the City effect expenditures and
legally binding commitments made by the Subrecipient before it received notice of such revision, provided
that such amounts have been committed in good faith and are otherwise allowable and that such
commitments are consistent with HUD cash withdrawal guidelines.
27. Purchase and Invoice Deadlines:
28.
29.
30.
Purchase of equipment or property must be completed before the last three (3) months of the initial
performance period and all equipment bills are to be paid before the last two (2) months of this period. No
expendable or non-expendable property or equipment is to be purchased during the final three (3) months
of the initial performance period unless approved by the City in writing. Invoices for all obligations incurred
under this Agreement must be submitted to the Redevelopment and Housing Department within sixty (60)
days after the initial performance period termination date or they may not be honored. Exceptions to the
preceding limitations require prior written approval by the City.
Invoices will not be honored unless and until periodic reports are current.
Non-expendable Property:
A record shall be maintained by the Subrecipient for each item of non-expendable property acquired with
CDBG funds. This record shall be provided to the City as well as being available for inspection and audit
by the City upon reasonable notice. Non-expendable property means tangible personal property having
a useful life of more than one (1) year and an acquisition cost of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more
per unit. The Subrecipient shall not purchase or agree to purchase non-expendable property without the
prior written approval of the City. Upon completion or early termination of this Agreement, the City reserves
the right to determine the final disposition of said non-expendable property acquired for this program and
CDBG funds in compliance with applicable laws and regulations. Disposition may include, but is not limited
to, the City taking possession of said non-expendable property.
Expendable Personal Property:
Expendable personal property refers to all tangible personal property other than non-expendable personal
property. The Subrecipient shall not purchase or agree to purchase expendable personal property with a
unit value of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more per unit without the prior written approval of the City.
Purchase or Lease of Non-Expendable Property or Equipment:
The Subrecipient shall obtain three documented bids prior to purchasing or leasing any non-expendable
personal property or equipment over one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in unit value. The Subrecipient
shall purchase or lease from the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. This inventory shall be
provided to the City as well as being available for inspection and audit upon reasonable notice at the
request of the City.
31. Travel and Conference Restrictions:
32.
The Subrecipient certifies and agrees that travel and conference expenses will not be paid for by funds
provided through this Agreement.
Affirmative Action Policy:
The Subrecipient shall make a "good faith" effort to ensure that all projects funded wholly or in part by
CDBG funds shall provide equal employment and career advancement opportunities for minorities and
women. A "good faith" effort includes, but is not limited to, advertising in one or more minority or women's
publications; direct solicitations; and requesting assistance from minority and women community
organizations, contractor groups, local state or federal minority and women business assistance office or
other organizations that provide assistance to in the recruitment and placement of minorities and women.
In addition, the Subrecipient shall make every effort to employ residents of the area and shall keep a
record of the positions that have been created directly or as a result of this program.
A Provision of Program Services
(1) The Subrecipient shall not on the ground of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual
orientation, disability or familial status exclude any person from participation in, deny any
person the benefits of, or subject any person to discrimination under any program or
activity funded in whole or in part with CDBG funds.
6
(2) The Subrecipient shall not under any program or activity funded in whole or in part with
CDBG funds, on the ground of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation,
disability, or familial status:
(a) Deny any facilities, services, financial aid or other benefits provided under the
program or activity.
(b) Provide any facilities, services, financial aid or other benefits which are different
or are provided in a different form from that provided to others under the program
or activity.
(c) Subject to segregated or separate treatment in any facility in, or in any manner
or process related to receipt of any service or benefit under the program or
activity.
(d) Restrict in any way access to, or in the enjoyment of any advantage or privilege
enjoyed by others in connection with facilities, services, financial aid, or other
benefits under the program or activity.
(e) Treat an individual differently from others in determining whether the individual
satisfies any admission, enrollment, eligibility, membership, or other requirement
or condition, which the individual must meet in order to be provided any facilities,
services, or other benefit provided under the program or activity.
(f) Deny an opportunity to participate in a program or activity as an employee.
(3) The Subrecipient may not utilize criteria or methods of administration which have the
effect of subjecting individuals to discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin,
sex, sexual orientation, disability, or familial status or have the effect of defeating or
substantially impairing accomplishment of the objectives of the program or activity with
respect to individuals of a particular race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation,
disability, or familial status.
(4) The Subrecipient, in determining the site or location of housing or facilities provided in
whole or in part with CDBG funds, may not make the selections of such site or location
which have the effect of excluding individuals from, denying them the benefits of, or
subjecting them to discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual
orientation, disability, or familial status or which have the purpose or the effect of
defeating or substantially impairing the accomplishment of the objectives of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 and amendments thereto.
(5) (a) In administering a program or activity funded in whole or in part with CDBG funds
regarding which the Subrecipient has previously discriminated against persons
on the grounds of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability,
or familial status, the Subrecipient must take affirmative actions to overcome the
effects of prior discrimination.
(b) Even in the absence of such prior discrimination the Subrecipient, in
administering a program or activity funded in whole in part with CDBG funds,
should take affirmative action to overcome the effects of conditions which would
otherwise result in limiting participation by persons of a particular race, color,
national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or familial status. Where
previous discriminatory practice or usage tends, on the grounds of race, color,
national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or familial status, to exclude
individuals from participation in, to deny them the benefits or, or to subject them
to discrimination under any program or activity to which CDBG funding applies,
the Subrecipient has an obligation to take reasonable action to remove or
overcome the consequences of the prior discriminatory practice or usage, and to
accomplish the purpose of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and amendments thereto.
(c) The Subrecipient shall not be prohibited by this part from taking any eligible
action to ameliorate an imbalance in services or facilities provided to any
geographic area or specific group of persons within its jurisdiction where the
purpose of such action is to overcome prior discriminatory practice or usage.
7
B.
(6) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in Sections A(1 )-(5), nothing contained herein
shall be construed to prohibit the Subrecipient from maintaining or constructing separate
living facilities or rest room facilities for the different sexes. Furthermore, selection on the
basis of sex is not prohibited when institutional or custodial services can properly be
performed only by a member of the same sex as the recipients of the services.
Employment Discrimination
(1) The Subrecipient shall not discriminate against any employee or applicant for
employment because of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or
familial status. The Subrecipient shall take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are
employed, and that employees are treated, during employment, without regard to their
race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or familial status. Such
action shall include, but not be limited to, the following: employment, upgrading, demotion
or transfer, recruitment or recruitment advertising, layoff or termination, rate of pay or
other forms of compensation and selection for training including apprenticeship. The
Subrecipient agrees to post in a conspicuous place available to employees and
applicants for employment, notices setting forth the provisions of this nondiscrimination
clause.
(2) The Subrecipient shall, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by or
on behalf of the Subrecipient, state that all qualified applicants will receive consideration
for employment without regards to race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation,
disability, or familial status.
(3) The Subrecipient shall send to each labor union or representative of workers with whom
it has a collective bargaining agreement or other contract or understanding, a notice to
be provided by the City's contracting officers advising the labor union or workers'
representative of the Sub recipient's commitments under Section 202 of Executive Order
No. 11246 of September 24, 1965, and shall post copies of the notice in conspicuous
places available to employees and applicants for employment.
( 4) The Subrecipient shall comply with all provisions of Executive Order 11246 of September
24, 1965, and of the rules, regulations, and relevant orders of the Secretary of Labor.
(5) The Subrecipient shall furnish to the City all information and reports required by Executive
Order No. 11246 of September 24, 1965, and by the related rules, regulations, and
orders.
(6) In the event of the Subrecipient's failure to comply with any rules, regulations, or orders
required to be complied with pursuant to this Agreement, the City may cancel, terminate,
or suspend in whole or in part its performance and the Subrecipient may be declared
ineligible for further government contracts in accordance with the procedures authorized
in Executive Order No. 11246 of September 24, 1965, or by rule, regulation, or order of
the Secretary of Labor, or as otherwise provided by law.
(7) The Subrecipient shall include the provisions of the "Affirmative Action Policy,"
Paragraphs B.(1) through (6), above, in every subcontract or purchase order unless
exempted by rules, regulations, or order of the Secretary of Labor, issued pursuant to
Section 204 of Executive Order No. 11246 of September 24, 1965, so that such
provisions will be binding upon each subcontractor or vendor.
The Subrecipient shall take such action with respect to any subcontract or purchase order
as the City may direct as a means of enforcing such provisions including sanctions for
noncompliance; provided, however, that in the event the Subrecipient becomes involved
in, or is threatened with, litigation with a subcontractor or vendor as a result of such
direction by the City, the Subrecipient may request the United States to enter into such
litigation to protect the interests of the United States.
(8) The Subrecipient shall not discriminate on the basis of age in violation of any provision
of the Age Discrimination Act of 1975 (42 U.S.C. 6101 et seq.) or with respect to any
otherwise qualified disabled individual as provided in Section 504 of the Rehabilitation
Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794). The Subrecipient shall also provide ready access to and use
of all CDBG funds assisted buildings to physically disabled persons in compliance with
8
33.
34.
the standards established in the Architectural Barriers Act of 1 968 (42 U.S. C . 4 1 51 et
seq.) and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1 992.
Religious Proselytizing or Political Activities:
The Subrecipient agrees that it will not perform or permit any religious proselytizing or political activities
in connection with the performance of this Agreement. Funds under this agreement will be used
exclusively for performance of the services required under this Agreement and no funds shall be used to
promote any religious or political activities. Further in accordance with 24 CFR 570.200U), et. seq., the
Subrecipient shall not:
A Engage in inherently religious activities, such as worship, religious instruction, or proselytization,
as part of the programs or services funded under this part. If an organization conducts such
activities, the activities must be offered separately, in time or location, from the programs or
services funded under this part, and participation must be voluntary for the beneficiaries of the
HUD-funded programs or services;
B. Use direct CDBG funds to support any inherently religious activities, such as worship, religious
instruction, or proselytization;
C. Discriminate against a program beneficiary or prospective program beneficiary on the basis of
religion or religious beliefs;
D. Use CDBG funds for the acquisition, construction, or rehabilitation of structures to the extent that
those structures are used for inherently religious activities,
Faith Based Organizations:
Notwithstanding Paragraph 33 above, if Subrecipient is a Faith Based Organization, Subrecipient agrees
to abide by Executive Order 1 3279, as promulgated at 24 CFR 5.1 09, et. seq.
35. Alterations, Encumbrances. Mechanics' Liens:
The Subrecipient agrees that it will not make, or suffer to be made, any alterations to the CDBG funded
improvements, the property or any part thereof, without the prior written consent of the City. The
Subrecipient shall keep the property free from any encumbrances or liens arising out of any work
performed, material furnished, or obligations incurred by the Subrecipient. The Subrecipient agrees to
submit performance, and labor and materials bonds on any improvements over $5,000.00.
36. Notices:
All notices, memoranda, reports, drafts, and communications shall be served in writing. The notices shall
be sent to the following addresses.
City
Community Development - Housing
City of El Cajon
200 Civic Center Way
El Cajon, CA 92020
9
Subrecipient
East County Transitional Living Center,
Inc.
Attn: Harold H. Brown,
Chief Executive Officer
1 527 East Main Street
El Cajon, CA 9202 1
37. Amendments: Variations:
38.
39.
This writing with attachments embodies the whole of the Agreement of the parties hereto. There are no
oral Agreements not contained herein, except as herein provided, addition or variation of the terms of this
Agreement shall not be valid unless made in the form of a written amendment to the Agreement formally
approved and executed by the City Council.
Savings Clause:
If any provision of this Agreement is found to be invalid, void, or unenforceable, the remaining provisions
shall, insofar as reasonably possible, continue in full force in effect without being impaired or invalidated
in any way.
Exhibit(s):
The Exhibits to this Agreement are an integral part of this Agreement and have each been incorporated
herein.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have caused this Agreement to be executed as of the day and year first
written above.
icipal corporation,
By Graham Mitchell, City Manager
By
Chief Executive Officer
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
10
EXHIBIT "A"
SCOPE OF WORK AND BUDGET
Project: Emergency Shelter Program for Homeless
Contact Person: Harold H. Brown, Chief Executive Officer (619-977-0633)
Statement of Work: The Subrecipient agrees to use the Community Development Block Grant funds
allocated by the City for Fiscal Year 2019-2020 to provide the Emergency Shelter Program for Homeless Program/Project in the City of El Cajon.
Section 1 - Work Description:
(To be completed by Subrecipient-must describe work activities approved by City Council)
kv►-d JZ kot..(-O·􀀊j 1 􀀃 Mei½?-􀀓AA􀀔 \ 􀀄(?(>O"Li 􀀕v'􀀖
Section 2 - Records and Reporting
The Subrecipient shall submit a Periodic Performance Report, which shall become Exhibit "C" hereto, for the
previous reporting period. Reporting periods may be monthly or quarterly, at the Subrecipient's option, but must
remain consistent throughout the year. Periodic Performance Reports are due by the 10th of the month following
the reporting period. These reports shall include the following information:
A Number of individual clients served (individual client may be a person or a household)
B. Race of clients served
C. Ethnicity of clients served (Hispanic, yes or no - a person may be of any race and be Hispanic)
D. Number of disabled clients served (as defined by the Social Security Administrative Guidelines)
E. Whether or not the head of the household is female
F. Number of clients who are low income (per HUD guidelines)
G. Whether or not the client is an El Cajon resident.
H. Number of new clients assisted.
In addition, a brief narrative (Exhibit "C-2") must accompany the report. Narrative should include (but is not
limited to) the following:
A Outreach methods used;
B. Number and disposition of complaints received; and
C. Progress made toward goals as evidenced in Exhibit "A", or an explanation of lack thereof.
D. Any other accomplishments or problems/concerns the Agency wishes to report.
Section 3 - Key Program Goals and Timeline
East County Transitional Living Center, Inc. will pr􀃁ide ______ ( 􀃂1D) individuals
􀀆..,=·.,.j 􀀅?.􀀆!]!"7􀀇7􀀈' services in the City of El Cajon during the period of July 1, 2019te June 30, 2020.
Section 4 - Budget
with
The City agrees to pay Subrecipient a total sum of One Hundred Thousand and no/100s dollars
($100,000.00) to assist in the provision of the above mentioned services. It is further agreed that no funding
shall be disbursed unless the Subrecipient is in full compliance with the provisions of this Agreement. The City
shall make payment of these funds on a reimbursement basis contingent upon a written request and submittal of
receipts or appropriate proof of payment from the Subrecipient. Payments will not be paid unless and until
periodic reports are current. Payments may be made on a monthly or quarterly basis, at the Subrecipient's
option.
EXHIBIT "A-2"
PUBLIC SERVICE PROGRAM BUDGET
PROJECT TITLE
I Emergency Shelter Program for Homeless
COST COMPONENT CDBG FUNDS OTHER FUNDS2 IN-KIND TOTAL PROJECT
PERSONNEL SERVICES
Salaries (See Schedule B of
Application) ')..5°" 000 Fringe Benefits
Total Personnel 0
?.S , ooo• 0 0
CONTRACTUAL SERVICES
Professional Services Telephone /?-, 500 \ 000 Utilities 3000 Rent '3000 Insurance (required) '-i O , 00h Maintenance '?-Oon
Travel/Mileage
Fingerprinting
Other (specify)
Total Contractual
0 lD \ . 5W, 0 0
COMMODITIES
Program/Office Supplies
Printing
Postage/Office Equipment
Other (specify)E6 ?, "~ ..... 􀂮 \OQ.1Y)I)
Total Commodities
0 0 0 0
Total Project Budget
Use the space below to explain professional services, office equipment expenditures or other cost
components that require clarification: Ai/A-
Note: CDBG paid expenditures must be documented with receipts and or invoices that verify the expense was
incurred. To minimize the amount of expense documentation, we strongly suggest the CDBG dollars be used to
pay for only a few program costs and not spread out over several line items. If CDBG funds are requested to
pay for Personnel Services (salaries), system-generated reports may be submitted, and copies of timecards,
paychecks, etc. may be retained in Subrecipient's administrative office, and must be made available for review
upon request as set forth in Paragraph 9 of this Agreement.
2 Includes Federal and non- Federal funding sources
FY2019-2020 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT PROGRAM
R£.Q.UEST FOR PAYMENT
**NOTE: To request Electronic Version of this form, send an e-mail to jkasviki@cityofelcajon.us
EXHIBIT 11811
This Request for Payment is presented to the City of El Cajon to obtain reimbursement for the operation of the Project named below for the Payment Period listed below. The payment is
requested for the portion of the contract budget stated in Column B.
SUBRECIPIENT East County Transitional Living Center Inc
PAYMENT PERIOD
PREPARED BY
v zo19.20
Job Title
Job Title
Job Title
Salaries & Wages
Payroll Taxes
Fringe Benefits
PERSONNEL
Office Suplies
Postage
Rent and Utilities
---Tel ---'le
Otht::,
Other
Other
Other
Other-Shelter Pgrm
NON-PERSONNEL
Ivan Andujar
Contract IExpenditures to
Bnd2et Date
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0 $0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$100,000 $0.00
$100,000 $0.00
Balance
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$100,000.00
$100,000.00
Name
JUL
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
AUG
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
PROJECT Emergency Shelter Program for Homeless FY 2019-20
TOTAL PAYMENT
OCT
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
---------
( 619) 749-6413
Phone
NOV
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
DEC
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
JAN
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
FEB
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
MAR
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
APR
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
JUN
Total
I
$0.00
I
I
$0.00
I
I
!
I
I
I
I
I
I
$,0.00
ITOTAL PROGRAM I $100,000 I $0.00 I $100,000.00 I $0.00 I $0.00 I $0.00 I $0.00 I $0.00 I $0.00 I $0.00 I $0.00 I $0.00 I $0.00 I $0.00 I $11.00
I hereby certify the above expenditures were incurred in carrying out the objective of the project contract, are authorized in the approved contract budget, and that contracted services J
l
ere
performed in accordance with the Agreement.
Date Signature & Title ofSubrecipient Executive
CITY OF EL CAJON
COMMUI\ / DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT F JGRAM
PERIODIC PERFORMANCE REPORT
EXHIBIT "C"
FY Period Reported: ___F_ Y'-=20"'"1"""9"---=2""0-=2.a-0 _____ _ Quarter/Month Reported: _____________ _
Agency Name: East County Transitional Living Center Inc Reporter's Name: Ivan Andujar
Program Name: Emergency Shelter Program FY 201 9-20 Phone Number: (619) 749-6413
Numbers served m ust reflect number of Persons (P} served. N umber of Households (H) served may only be reported with prior
approval of the Redevelopment & Housing Division.
Please indicate (P) or (H) :
1 . TOTAL
White
Black / African American
Asian
American Indian / Alaskan
Native
Native Hawaiian / Other
Pacific Islander
American Indian / Alaskan
Native and White
Asian and White
Black / African American
and White
American Indian / Alaskan
Native & Black / African
American
Other/Multi-Racial
2, TOTAL
Extremely Low Income
(0-30% MFI)
Low Income
(>30-50% MFI)
Moderate Income
(>50-80% MFI)
Income above 80% MFI
3. TOTAL
Homeless
Female Headed Households
Disabled/Special Needs
(P)
(A)
Number of Persons
served with El Cajon's
CDBG funding this
Quarter/Month
Total # Each Race
Annual City Grant Amount: $100,000
(8) (C)
How many in Column Cumulative number of (D)
(A) reported as Persons served
Year-To-Date How many in Column
Hispanic (this
(July 1 to end of (C) reported as
Quarter/Month for Each
Race)? current report period) Hispanic Year-To-Date?
Total # of Hispanics Total # Each Race Total # o!!-lispan􀂲s
Each Race Year-to-Date Each Race
IMPORTANT-PLEASE NOTE: 1) Hispanic is no longer considered a race, but an ethnicity and must be reported separately. A
member of any race m ust also report as Hispanic or Non-Hispanic. "Other" is for multi-racial reports only and m ust be identified in
the narrative report, 2) Totals for lines 1, 2, and 3 must match each other for each column. 3) List only unduplicated program
participants-clients receiving continued services from previous fiscal year may be counted only once during the new contract year.
4) A narrative report m ust accompany this form. The narrative should include the definition of "Persons Served" (typically El Cajon
residents) and should reflect all additional data collected as agreed in the contract such as Number of Families served, Number of
Projects Completed, Number of Program Hours providec!, Numbe_r of Bed Nights provided,_oLotheLeertormance ___ outcome 􀂳
- - Measuremenls. Forcfueslions, please call the Housing Division a t (619) 441-1 786.
Rev. 06/13/201 4 c:\userslivau_a\desktop\cbdg-hud programs\emer. housing fy 2018-19\exhibit c - periodic program report_lB-19.doc
CDBG LOW 􀂟 (OD CLIENTELE NATIONAL OBJECTIV" 1IBPORT
EXHIBIT "C-2"
1FEDERAL FISCAL YEAR 2019-2020
PROJECT STATUS NARRATIVE
The purpose of this form is to report accomplishment data for the project named below. This form must be completed for projects providing
eligible CDBG/HOME activities to Low to Moderate Income residents of the City of El Cajon. This form must be completed and submitted
with each monthly/quarterly Periodic Performance Report.
AGENCY NAME:
PROJECT NAME:
REPORTING PERIOD:
PREPARED BY:
PROJECT STATUS :
East County Transitional Living Center Inc
Emergency Shelter Program for Homeless FY 20 19-20
Ivan Andujar
NAME
Pending D Active D
PROJECT STATUS NARRATIVE:
PHONE
Complete D Date:
SUBJECT :
REFERE NC E :
P U RPOSE
C I TY O F E L CAJ O N
CITY C O U N C I L P O L I CY
I n s u ra n ce Req u i rements
Adopted 7 /26/94
Ame n d ed 1 1 /29/05
Amen d ed 04/1 4/1 5
EXH I B IT D
POLICY
D-3
E F FECTIVE PAG E
04/1 4/1 5 1 of 8
To provide a u n iform C ity policy for liability insura nce req uirements a nd to esta blish proced ures fo r
its con s isten t appl icatio n .
BACKGRO U N D
T o help p rotect t h e C ity against liability, a l l i n d ivid uals, contractors , agen cies and organ izations
cond u ctin g b usi ness in association with , o n behalf of, o r in certa i n circu mstances within the City of
E l Caj o n a re req u i red to maintain adeq u ate liabi lity i n s u ra n ce coverage a cceptable to the City.
Beca u se of the differing levels of p rotection n eeded for various a ctivities conducted with in the C ity,
the City has established policy limits a n d sta n d a rds which d irectly relate to the type of activity
being con d u cted .
POLICY
All ind ivid uals, contracto rs , agencies, a n d org a n izations co nducting busi n ess either for the City of
E l Caj o n (or the S uccessor Agency to the E l C aj o n Redevelop ment Age n cy) o r p u rsuant to a n
o rd in a nce , reso lutio n , a g reement o r pol icy req u iring the mainte nance o f l iability insu ra n ce s h a l l
p rovide p roof of liability insu ran ce i n t h e following amou nts and written o n a n occurre nce basis
(claims m a d e cove rage will be accepted o n ly after verifying that occu rrence coverage is not
availa ble) :
1 . A comb ined s i n g le limit po licy with aggreg ate lim its in the amount of $2 million for a l l
co nstruction p rojects and for carn ivals , subdivision s , and poll ution coverage subject t o
sectio n 5 . c . u n d e r t h e head i n g " I N S U RA N C E STAN DAR D S , " with a m?ximum deductible
or self-in s u ra n ce retention ("S I R") of $500 , 000; for policies n ot h aving a " combined si ngle
limit," m i n i m u m l i m its in amou nts as fol lows :
C o m m e rcial General Liability (CGL): I ns u ra n ce Services Office Form CG 00 0 1 cove ring
CGL on a n "occu rrence" basis, including products and completed operatio n s , property
damage, bodily i nj u ry and perso n a l & advertis ing inj u ry with l imits no less than $ 1 ,000 ,000
per o ccu rrence. I f a genera l aggreg ate limit applies, eithe r the ge ne ral aggregate limit shall
apply sepa rately to this project/location or the general aggregate limit shall be twice the
req u i red occu rren ce li mit.
U n less staff dete rmines that circumsta n ces (i.e. hig h risk project, etc.) req u i re the higher
limit, the $2 ,000 , 000 limit shall be decreased to $ 1 ,000,000 with a maxi m u m ded u ctible o r
S I R of $ 1 50,000, whe n :
SUBJECT :
REFERENCE :
CITY OF EL CAJON
CITY COUNCIL POLICY
Insurance Req uireme nts
Adopted 7 /26/94
Amended 11/29/05
Amended 04/1 4/1 5
EXH IBIT D
POLICY
D-3
EFFECTIVE PAG E
04/1 4/1 5 2 of 8
a. The public improvements portion of a subdivision project is less than $50,000; or
b. A construction project (in accordance with the Standard Specific ations for Public
Works Construction-and the Standard Special Provisions, the "Green Book") is for
less than $50,000.
2. Except as otherwise provided in th is policy, a co mbined single limit policy with aggregate
lim its in the amount of $2 million for all others, including, but not limited to , athletic leagues,
re creation groups, towi ng companies and public service agencies ; for policies not having a
"combined single limit," minimum limits in amounts as fo llows:
Commercial General Liability (CGL): Insurance Services Office Form CG 00 01 covering
CGL on an "occu rrence" basis, including prod ucts and co mplete d operations, property
damage, bodily injury and personal & advertising injury with limits no less than $1 ,000,000
per occu rrence. If a general aggreg ate limit applies, either the general aggregate limit shall
apply separately to th is project/location or the general aggreg ate limit shall be twice the
re quired occurrence limit.
3. A co mbi ned single limit policy with aggregate limits in the amount of $250,000 fo r
homeowners ins urance or $500,000 fo r commercial general liability insurance for small
business owners, in either eve nt only where the insurance is re quired for wo rk in the pu blic
rig ht-of-way. "Small business owners" are defined as commercia l businesses, or a
professional or administrative offi ce uses, where the own ers of the business work on-site
as th eir primary calling or vocatio n, and having no more th an two (2) employees not related
by blood or marriage.
4. Selected hig h-risk activities that would otherwise fa ll under the criteria fo r category 2 shall
be eva lu ated by staff on a case-by-case basis to dete rm ine whether or not the above limits
are suffi cient. The imposition of liability limits exceed ing $2 million for such high -risk
activities is appealable to the City Council.
5. $1 ,000,000 for taxicab co mpan ies.
6. $500 ,000 or actual value, whichever is greater, for "valuable papers" and "in transit"
insurance where City records or personal property is being transported or stored outside of
City property.
EXHI BIT D
SUBJ ECT :
REF E RENC E :
C I TY O F E L CAJ O N
C I TY C O U N C I L P O L I CY
I nsura n ce Req u i reme nts
Adopted 7 /26/94
Amended 1 1 /29/05
Ame nded 04/1 4/1 5
POLICY
D-3
E F F ECTIVE PAG E
04/1 4/1 5 3 of 8
7 . Exceptio ns to the above lim its may be made for n o n -profit, charitable, pol itica l , com m u n ity
and religious orga n izations.
8 . The pol icy o r pol icies of i n s u ra n ce may be for a l l operations o r activities of the pa rty
purchas i ng the policy or pol icies p rovided, h oweve r, that the C ity or the S u ccessor Agency
may req uire a sepa rate po licy excl us ively for operations of the p u rchaser where the C ity
M an ager, i n h is or her sole d is cretio n , determi nes that a s i ngle policy wo u ld be inadequate
to p rotect the City or Su ccessor Age n cy in the event of m u ltiple catastrophes.
9 . Workers' compensation i n s u ra n ce shall meet the m i nimum lim its req uired b y law.
I NSURANCE STANDARDS
1 . ADM I TT E D CAR R I E R / B E ST'S RAT I N G A, C LASS VI I
a. I n surers m ust be " a d mitted" ca rriers p u rsuant to the p rovisions of the California
I n sura n ce Code and in accord a n ce with all req u i rements of the State I n s u ra n ce
C ommission and m ust be listed in the:
" O F F I C IAL P U B L I CATI O N
D E PARTM E N T O F I N S U RANCE
STATE O F CAL I F O R N I A
45 F remont Street
S a n F ra ncisco, Ca lifornia 94 1 05
I N S U RA N C E O R GAN IZAT I O N S AUTH O R I ZED BY T H E I N S U RA N C E
COMM I S S I O N TO TRAN SACT B U S I N ES S O F I N S U RANCE
I N THE STATE O F CAL I F O R N IA D U R I N G
[th e most recent yea r for wh ich
the publ ication is ava ilable] ."
or
"Califo rn ia Department of I n s u ra n ce Co mpany Profile ."
S U BJECT :
C I TY O F E L CAJ O N
C I TY C O U N C I L P O L I CY
I n s u ra n ce Req u irements
EXHI B IT D
POLICY
D-3
REFERENC E : Ado pted 7 /26/94 E F FE CTIVE PAG E
Amended 1 1 /29/05
Amended 04/1 4/1 5 04/1 4/1 5 4 of 8
b. I n s u rers m ust h ave a Best's rati ng of A, C lass V I I or h igher (th is ratin g includes
th ose i n s u rers with a m i n i m u m policyholder's s u rp l us of $50 to $ 1 00 million).
Exceptions to the B est's rating may be considered wh en a n insura n ce carrier meets
a l l other standards a n d can satisfy s u rplus amounts eq u iva lent to an A, C lass VI I
rati n g . An exceptio n to the rating req u i rement may be made for the California State
Compe nsation I ns u ra n ce F u n d if not rated.
2. N O N -ADM ITT E D CAR RI E R / B E ST'S RAT I N G A , C lass XI I
Exce ptio ns to the "adm itted" req u i rement may be co nsidered when a non-admitted
i n s u ra n ce carrier meets a l l other sta n d a rd s h erei n a n d :
a . is either ( i ) listed in :
Ca lifornia Department of I nsu ran ce
L ist of Approved S u rplus Line I ns u rers
L I STI N G OF F I L I N G S
or (ii) is c u rrently a party t o co-operation agreeme nts with foreign insura nce
reg u latory authorities a cceptable to the C ity M anager or C ity Attorney (fo r example,
fo r i n s u rers located i n the U n ited Kingdom, agreements must be with both the
Prudential Reg u l atory Authority ("P RA") and the Fin ancial Cond u ct Authority ("FCA"),
or s u ch su ccessor authority or authorities of P RA a nd FCA;
b. either the carrier o r its parent company has a Best's ratin g of A, C lass VI I (this rating
include those insurers with a m i n i m u m pol icyho lde r's s u rplus of $50 to $ 1 00 millio n ;
c. h as te n years or more experience in the busi ness of insurance; a n d
d . i f applicable, the re insura n ce carrier has a qua lified rati n g .
3 . G EN E RAL - I NS U RA N C E C E RTI F I CATES / A D D I T IONAL I N S U R E D
Al l i n s u rers (including those insuring agai nst pollution o r d ischarges o f h azard o u s
materials) m u st provide certificates of i n s u ra n ce and endorsements evid e n cing cove rage
p rior to the start of a ny co ntract. All certificates or endorsements must include:
S U BJ ECT :
C I TY O F EL CAJO N
C I TY C O U N C I L P O LICY
I n s u ra n ce Req u i rements
EXH I B IT D
POLICY
D-3
R E F E RE NC E : Ad opted 7 /26/94 E F F ECTIVE PAG E
Ame nded 1 1 /29/05
Ame nded 04/1 4/1 5
• N ame of i n s u ra n ce co mpany issuing each policy.
04/1 4/1 5 5 of 8
All insu rers m u st p rovide a n o riginal e n d o rseme nt naming the C ity of El Cajon
(a nd/or the S u ccessor Agency to the El Cajon Redeve lopme nt Age n cy), and its
(their) e lected a n d appoi nted officia ls , officers, employees a nd volu nteers (fo r
p urposes of this P o l icy, i n d ivid u a lly a n d c o l l e ct ive ly, the " C ity I n s u re d s ") a s
a d d itio n a l i n s u re d s . T h i s i n c l u s i o n a s add itional insureds shall not b e required of
Workers' Compen sation o r p rofessional liabi lity policies of i n s u ra nce, and may be
waived fo r "va lua ble papers" coverage with the approval of the C ity Atto rney.
• All i n s u rers m ust provide a n o riginal e n do rsement stating that the insurance
coverage s h a l l be primary i n s u rance as respects the City of E l C ajon (a nd/or the
S u ccessor Age n cy to the El Caj o n Redevelopment Agency) , and its (their) elected
and appoi nted officials, officers , em ployees a nd vol u nteers (for p u rposes of this
Policy, i n d ivid u a l ly a n d collectively, the "C ity I n s u reds . Any i n s u ra n ce o r selfinsu
rance m a i nta ined by the Entity, its officers, officia ls, employees , or volu nteers
shall be excess of the C o ntractor's i n s u ra n ce and shall not contribute with it.
• Waiver of S u b rogation end orsement is req uired on Workers' Compensation
C overage.
• Add ress of n amed i n s u red .
• Description of coverage, including any special coverage req u i red by the contract.
• Policy n u mbers .
, Policy periods ( I f claims made basis, m ust in clud e retroactive date and length of
time allowed as exte nded reporting period).
• Coverage type (occu rrence form vs. claims m ade) .
• Authorized signature a n d d ate of issu a n ce . An o rig inal signature is req u i red : a
d igital sign atu re is a ccepta ble so long as it complies with the req u irements of
Govern ment Code § 1 6 . 5 .
• U n less approved by the C ity M a n ager o r designee, no certificate s h a l l be accepted
that q u a lifies the o b l igation of the carrier to provide 30 days written notice of
cancellation of the policy. With the approval of th e C ity Atto rney the obligatio n to
p rovide n otice of cancellation may be red u ced to te n ( 1 0) d ays , but o n ly fo r
term ination d u e to the non-payment of any p remiu m .
SUBJECT :
REFERENCE:
CITY OF EL CAJON
CITY COUNCIL POLICY
Insurance Req uirements
Adopted 7/26/94
Amended 11 /29/05
Amended 04/1 4/1 5
EX HIBIT D
POLICY
D-3
EFFECTIVE PAGE
04/1 4/1 5 6 of 8
4. PUBLIC WORKS PROJ ECTS
In addition to the standards set forth above , insurance policies fo r public works proje cts
must also meet the fo llowing insurance req uirements set out in the most rece nt ed ition of
the Green Book adopted by the City Council:
a. All insurance certificates shall bear an endorsement or shall have attached a rider
whereby it is provided that, in the eve nt of expiration or proposed cancellation of
such policy for any reason whatsoever, the City shall be notified by certified mail,
retu rn rece ipt req uested, giving a sufficient time befo re the date thereof to comply
with any applicable law or statute , but in no event less than thirty (30) days before
expiration or cancellation is effective, the provisions of section 3 herein
notwithstanding; and
b. Compliance with Labor Code §§3700 and 3800 re lating to Workers' Compensation.
c. Req u irements of the Green Book shall pre vail.
5. PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
An applica nt for perm it(s) to do work within the public right-of-way may establish
sa tisfactory proof of liability insurance in the fo llowi ng manner:
a. CONTRACTO RS
Contractors must fu rnish the City with a certificate of liability insurance, which meets
the re quirements set forth above and any oth er City requirements contained in th is
policy.
b. HOMEOWNERS / PROPERTY OWN ERS
Homeowners/P roperty owners requesting a permit to do work with in City rights-ofway
or easements immediately adjace nt to their respective owned or occupied
property, solely for the owner's personal benefit, shall be re quired to fu rnish the City
with a copy of their homeowner's/p roperty owner's liability insurance policy, which
meets the req uireme nts set forth above , with the minimum limits described in
category 3 under the heading "POLICY," above. The pol icy must be effective during
the entire period of the proposed wo rk, plus two (2) ca lendar years, and must
provide coverage for claims arising from the work performed , or improve ments
owned, by the homeowner in the right-of-way or easement. If the encroach ment is
S U BJECT :
REF ERENC E :
C I TY O F EL CAJ O N
C I TY COU N C I L P O L I CY
I n s u ra n ce Requ i rements
Adopted 7/26/94
Amended 1 1 /29/05
Amended 04/1 4/1 5
EXH I B IT D
POLICY
D-3
E F FECTIVE PAG E
04/1 4/1 5 7 of 8
ongoing , a n n u a l proof of insurance shall be req u ired . The req u i rement to name the
C ity as an add itional i n s u red , and the req u irement for a policy for two (2) additional
calendar years, may each be waived by the C ity Coun cil or the C ity M a n ager (or her
designee) i n cases of extreme hardship, i n their d iscretion .
c. P O L L UT I O N EXC L U S I O N
Applications fo r t h e i n sta llation of mon ito ring wells for the evaluation o f g ro u n dwater
pol lution or for th e d ischarge of formerly polluted g ro u n dwater i nto the C ity sewer
system m ust be a ccompan ied by a certificate of liability insu rance p rovided by the
p roperty owner. Such liability insu rance may not contain a pollution exclusion clause
and must explicitly indemn ify the C ity against all hazards wh ich may res u lt from
either of these activities, includ ing a worsen ing of pollutio n , e ither with in the
subsu rface adjacent to the o riginal poll ution or within the City sewer system .
If the property owner is u n able to provide i n s u rance which addresses both general
liability and pollution liabi lity, the e nviro n m en tal company or oth er appropriately
qua lified entity contracting with the property owner for either monitoring wel l
in stal lation o r g ro u ndwate r pollution remed iation , m a y furnish pollution liab ility
i n s u ra n ce on behalf of the property own er.
Any i n s u ra n ce approved u nder this su bsection c. shall be an occurrence policy, and
shall otherwise comply with the provisions of t h is Policy.
d. P U B L I C UTI L I T I E S
This policy as i t relates t o work in t h e p u b l i c rig hts-of-way s h a l l not be applicable to
Cable TV, He lix Water District, Padre Dam M u n icipal Water District, S B C , S a n
Diego G a s & E lectric, o r any other p u blic utility.
e. TRAN SPORTAT ION / OVERSIZE LOADS - PERMITS - See Chapter 10.24 of the
El Cajon Municipal Code.
S U BJ ECT :
REFERE N C E :
C I TY O F E L CAJ O N
C I TY C O U N C I L P O L I CY
I n su ra n ce Requ i rements
Adopted 7/26/94
Ame nded 1 1 /29/05
Ame nded 04/1 4/1 5
T I M E L I M ITS / CANCELLAT I O N PROVISIONS
EXH I B IT D
POLI CY
D-3
E F FECTIVE PAG E
04/1 4/1 5 8 of 8
All l iab ility insu ran ce req u i red p u rsuant to th is policy shall p rovide coverage for a sufficient time
pe riod to protect the C ity from liability. The insurer is req u i red to provide a m i n i m u m of thirty (30)
d ays- n otice of cance llation of any policy. With the a p p roval of the City Atto rney (except as
p rovided i n section 4, h e rein) t h is obligatio n may be red u ced to n ot less than ten ( 1 0) d ays writte n
notice , b u t o n ly fo r te rmination d u e to the n o n -payment of a n y premium . I n n o event shall a policy
be accepted wh ich te rminates prior to the completion of the activity to be covered .
I n certain circumstances , it may be i m p racticable to o btai n conti n u in g insu ra n ce coverage due to
the du ration of th e a ctivity or the cost of prematu re renewa l. U n der such circumsta n ces , a n
exception to t h e coverage period m a y b e made s o long as the po licy i s renewed or replaced with
an accepta ble ins ura n ce carrier a n d the re is no lapse in coverage. M a i ntenance of proper
insura nce cove rage is a mate rial term of any contract with the City a n d fa i l u re to maintain or
ren ew cove rage o r to p rovide evide n ce of renewa l may be treated as a material breach of
co ntract.
ALTERNATIVE RISK MANAGEMENT PRACTICES; S ELF-INS U RAN C E ; RIS K-POOLING
Alternative risk ma nagement p ractices, such as self-insura n ce, risk pooling, risk retention g roups,
and othe r such programs, will be accepted in l ieu of commercial i n s u ra nce policies provided that
the cove rage meets the req u i rements of this Policy. Any such a lternative risk ma n agement
p ractices must meet the fin a n cial strength and s u rplus req uirements reflected by the B est's
Ratings req u ired of com mercia l i n s u ra n ce u nder this Policy .
EXHIBIT "E"
DECLARATION OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS
In submitting its proposal, SUBRECIPIENT represents that SUBRECIPIENT's responses to the
following questions are true and correct:
1. The proposed public project may affect the market value of real property in the vicinity of the project
site.
a. Does the SUBRECIPIENT or anyone in the SUBRECIPIENT's organization Yes
have a financial interest in real property located within 2500 feet of the □ 􀂀
project site?
b. Has the SUBRECIPIENT or anyone in the SUBRECIPIENT's organization,
rendered professional services concerning real property located within 2500
feet of the project site? □ 􀂁
C. Has the SUBRECIPIENT or anyone in the SUBRECIPIENT's organization
received income from real property that is located within 2500 feet of the
project site? □ B"'
2. The proposed project may affect businesses in the vicinity of the project site.
a. Does the SUBRECIPIENT or anyone in the SUBRECIPIENT's organization
have a financial interest in a business located within 2500 feet of the project
site? □ ¥
b. Has the SUBRECIPIENT or anyone in the SUBRECIPIENT's organization
rendered professional services concerning a business that is located within
2500 feet of the project site? □ E:"
C. Has the SUBRECIPIENT or anyone in the SUBRECIPIENT's organization
received income from a business that is located within 2500 feet of the
project site? □ 􀂂
3. Does anyone in SUBRECIPIENT's organization have a spouse or other family
member who has a financial interest in anv such real property or business? □ "&/'
SUBRECIPIENT'S SIGNATURE
East County Transitional Living Center, Inc.
This docume is signed by an individual clearly authorized to bind SUBRECIPIENT.
I
EXHIBIT "F"
0MB CIRCULAR A-133 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
AUDITS OF STATES, LOCAL GOVERNMENTS AND
NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS
CFDA No. for this Grant/Agreement: 14.218 (Community Development Block Grant)
Non-Federal entities that expend $750,000 or more in a year in Federal awards shall have a single or programspecific
audit conducted for that year in accordance with the provisions of 0MB Circular
A-133. Please complete the following by placing an "X" in the appropriate box.
□ expended $750,000 or more in
Federal funds during the prior fiscal year (FY 201 8-1 9)/calendar year (201 8).
>( 􀀇tO:u-b 1􀀏.+J L:v􀀈 􀀊t l..n:.- , did not expend $750,000 or more in
Federal f􀂯ds during the prior fiscal year (FY 201 8-1 9)/calendar year (201 8).
I HEREBY CERTIFY I have the authority to sign for the above named agency and that the agency will comply
with the provisions of 0MB Circular A-133 and any other applicable Federal and State laws and regulations
hereinafter enacted.
By:
Signat
/d&mid Gcow0 Print Name
Title:
Date:
EXHIBIT "G"
WORKER'S COMPENSATION INSURANCE CERTIFICATE
The Subrecipient shall execute the following form as required by the California Labor Code,
Sections 1 860 and 1 861 .
I am aware of the provision of Section 3700 of the Labor Code which requires every employer to
be insured against liability for worker's compensation or to undertake self-insurance in
accordance with the provisions of that code, and I will comply with such provisions before
commencing the performance of the work of this contract.