AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE CITY OF EL CAJON AND
East County Transitional Living Center, Inc.
THIS AGREEMENT is made and entered into this q--ftt day of-"'c"-:1--􀃸r---' 2020, by and
between the CITY OF EL CAJON, a municipal corporation, hereinafter referre to " ity," and East County
Transitional Living Center, Inc., a nonprofit organization under the laws of the State of California, hereinafter
referred to as "Subrecipient";
WHEREAS, there exists a need within the City of El Cajon to provide a variety of services, including
housing, recreational, educational, and child care services and developmental programs; and
WHEREAS, the Subrecipient has expressed a desire and has the expertise and experience to operate
the program entitled "Railing Replacement at 1527 E. Main Street" in El Cajon; and
WHEREAS, the City has entered into a contract with the United States of America through its
Department of Housing and Urban Development, hereinafter called HUD, to execute the City's Community
Development Block Grant, hereinafter called CDBG, program under the Housing and Community Development
Act of 1974, as amended, hereinafter called the "Act".
NOW, THEREFORE, IT IS HEREBY MUTUALLY AGREED by and between the parties hereto as
follows:
1.
2.
City Review:
The City reserves the right to review and approve actions and decisions taken by the Subrecipient with
respect to the operation of.the Railing Replacement at 1527 E. Main Street for compliance with all
applicable regulations.
Subrecipient Status:
The City recognizes the Subrecipient as an independent nonprofit organization and agrees to cooperate
in protecting its image as a politically neutral organization.
3. Service Area:
4.
The Service area is City-wide in the City of El Cajon.
Scope of Services:
The Subrecipient shall perform all services described in the project description and Scope of Work and
Budget set forth as Exhibit "A" to this Agreement, a copy of which is attached hereto and incorporated
herein by this reference.
5. Time of Performance:
Said services of the Subrecipient are to commence no sooner than July 1, 2020 and shall be completed
no later than June 30, 2021.
6. Compensation and Method of Payment:
7.
The City shall reimburse the Subrecipient for allowable costs incurred under the scope of the Agreement
and applicable Federal regulations, which have not been paid for or reimbursed in any other manner by
any other Agency or private source of funding. The total of all reimbursements shall not exceed
Twenty Five Thousand and no/100s dollars ($25,000.00).
Compliance with Laws and Assurances:
The Subrecipient hereby assures and certifies that it has complied with and will continue to comply with
the Housing and Community Development Act of 197 4, hereinafter called the Act, and all current and
future applicable federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, regulations, policies, guidelines, and
requirements as they relate to acceptance and use of Federal funds for this federally assisted program.
This Agreement is subject to all such laws, ordinances, regulations, policies, guidelines, and
requirements including without limitation, the Act, Title 2, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 200; Title
24, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 570; Title 29 Code of Federal Regulations, Parts 3 and 5; Title 24
Code of Federal Regulations Part 70 and Public Law 87-581.
1
8.
9.
10.
Records Retention:
The Subrecipient shall maintain and retain all financial records, supporting documents, statistical
records and all other records pertaining to the use of the funds provided under this Agreement for a
period of four (4) years at a minimum, and in the event of litigation, claim or audit, the records shall be
retained until all litigation, claims, and audit findings involving the records have been fully resolved.
Records for non-expendable property acquired with Federal funds provided under this Agreement shall
be retained for four (4) years after the final disposition of such property.
Monitoring:
The City will conduct periodic program monitoring reviews. These reviews will focus on the extent to
which the planned program has been implemented, measurable goals achieved, effectiveness of
program management, and impact of the program. Authorized representatives of the City and HUD shall
have the right of access to all activities and facilities operated by the Subrecipient under this Agreement.
Facilities include all files, records, and other documents related to the performance of this Agreement.
Activities include attendance at staff, board of directors, advisory committee, and advisory board
meetings and inspection by City and HUD representatives, and to ensure that its employees and board
members furnish such information, as in the judgment of City and HUD representatives, may be relevant
to the question of compliance with contractual conditions and HUD directives, or the effectiveness,
legality and achievements of the program.
Program Reporting:
The Subrecipient agrees to prepare and submit financial, program progress, evaluations, and other
reports as required by HUD or the City. The Subrecipient shall maintain such program, property,
personnel, financial and other records and accounts as are considered necessary by HUD or the City to
assure proper accounting for all Contract funds. Sub-recipient shall submit all financial requirements in
Exhibit "B" (Request for Payment forms). All of the Subrecipient's records, with the exception of
confidential client information, shall be made available to representatives of the City and the appropriate
Federal agencies. The Subrecipient is required to submit data necessary to complete the Annual
Subrecipient Performance Report and other federal documents in accordance with HUD regulations and
in the format and at the time designated by the City. Subrecipient shall submit a Periodic Performance
Report ( Exhibit "C") for the reporting period (may be either monthly or quarterly, as agreed to with the
City at time of contract execution) by the 10th day of the month following the reporting period. The
reports shall include the following information:
A Number of individual clients served (individual client may be a person or a household)
B. Race of clients served
C. Ethnicity of clients served (Hispanic, yes or no - a person may be of any race and be Hispanic)
D. Number of disabled clients served (as defined by the Social Security Administrative Guidelines)
E. Whether or not the head of the household is female
F. Number of clients who are low income (per HUD guidelines)
G. Whether or not the client is an El Cajon resident.
H. Number of new clients assisted.
In addition, a brief narrative must accompany the report ( Exhibit "C-2"). The narrative should include
(but is not limited to) the following:
A Outreach methods used;
B. Number and disposition of complaints received; and
C. Progress made toward goals as evidenced in Exhibit "A", or an explanation of lack thereof.
D. Any other accomplishments or problems/concerns the Agency wishes to report.
11. Accounting:
The Subrecipient must establish and maintain on a current basis, an adequate accrual and accounting
system in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and standards. The City, the
Federal Granter Agency, the Comptroller General of the United States, or any of their duly-authorized
representatives, shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of the Subrecipient
2
which directly pertain to the above project for the purpose of audit, examination, excerpts and
transcriptions.
12. Audits:
13.
14.
The Subrecipient is required to arrange for an independent financial and compliance audit annually for
each fiscal year Federal funds are received under this contract. Audits must be in compliance with 2
CFR Part 200, Subpart F. (Exhibit "F") An audit may be conducted by Federal, State, or local funding
source agencies as part of the City's audit responsibilities. The Subrecipient shall forward a copy of
the independent audit to the City for review within thirty (30) days of its completion. Within thirty
(30) days of the submittal of said audit report, the Subrecipient shall provide a written response to all
conditions or findings reported in said audit report. The response must examine each condition or
finding and explain a proposed resolution, including a schedule for correcting any deficiency. All
correction actions related to conditions or findings shall take place within six (6) months after receipt of
the audit report.
The City's authorized representatives shall at all times, have access for the purpose of audit or
inspection, to any and all books, documents, papers, records, property and premises of the
Subrecipient. Subrecipient staff will cooperate fully with authorized auditors when they conduct audits
and examinations of the Subrecipient's program. If indications of misappropriation or misapplication of
the funds of this Agreement cause the City to require a special audit, the cost of the audit will be
encumbered and deducted from the Subrecipient's CDBG award. Should the special audit confirm
misappropriation or misapplication of funds, the Subrecipient shall reimburse the City the amount of the
misapplication or misappropriation. In the event the City uses the judicial system to recover
misappropriated or misapplied funds, the Subrecipient shall reimburse the City for legal fees and court
costs in addition to awards.
Beneficiary Qualification:
The Subrecipient agrees to guarantee that at least fifty-one percent (51 %) of the beneficiaries of the
program identified in Exhibit "A," Scope of Work and Budget, are low and moderate income persons or
households. Under the CDBG regulations, the following clienteles are presumed to be low and
moderate income persons and can qualify for service regardless of income: abused children, elderly
persons, battered spouses, homeless persons, disabled persons, illiterate persons, and migrant farm
workers. Beneficiaries qualifying on the basis of income shall have an annual income equal to or less
than the current applicable Income Limits schedule published by HUD for the San Diego MSA, which
defines the maximum income for low and moderate income households. The Subrecipient is responsible
for obtaining the current applicable HUD Income Limits schedule for each year of the Agreement term
identified in Paragraph 6, Time of Performance. The Subrecipient shall retain these forms for three (3)
years after conclusion of the Agreement.
Assignment:
This Agreement is not assignable by the Subrecipient without the express prior written consent of the
City Council. Consent shall be given at the sole discretion of the City Council. Any attempt by the
Subrecipient to assign any performance of the terms of this Agreement shall be null and void and shall
constitute a material breach of this Agreement upon which the City may, among other remedies, and
without limitation, cancel, terminate, or suspend this Agreement.
15. Termination and Termination Costs:
This Agreement may be terminated in whole or in part at any time by either party upon giving thirty (30)
days written notice to the other party. Agreement must be reached by both parties as to reasons and
conditions for termination in compliance with the provisions of Title 2 Code of Federal Regulations Part
200. The City Manager is hereby empowered to give said notice subject to ratification by the City
Council.
The City may immediately terminate this Agreement upon the termination, suspension, discontinuation,
or substantial reduction in CDBG funding for the Contract activity or if for any reason the timely
completion of the work under this Agreement is rendered improbable, infeasible, or impossible. If the
Subrecipient materially fails to comply with any term of this Agreement, the City may take one of more of
the actions provided under 2 CFR Part 200, which includes temporarily withholding cash, disallowing,
noncompliance costs, wholly or partially terminating the award, withholding future awards, and other
remedies that are legally available. In such event, the Subrecipient shall be compensated for all
services rendered and all necessarily incurred costs performed in good faith in accordance with the
3
16.
terms of this Agreement that have been previously reimbursed, to the date of said termination to the
extent that CDBG funds are available from HUD.
Program Income:
A Program income defined as that money generated from the CDBG funds received herein, and
shall be retained by the Subrecipient.
B. The Subrecipient shall utilize the program income in accordance with Exhibit "A" and all
provisions of this Agreement shall apply to the disposition of program income.
C. Disposition of program income shall be done in accordance with Paragraph 18 of this
Agreement.
17. Reversion of Assets:
18.
Upon the expiration or termination of this Agreement, for any reason whatsoever, the Subrecipient shall
forthwith transfer to the City, any CDBG funds on hand at the time of such expiration or termination and
any accounts receivable attributable to the use of CDBG funds including without limitation, program
income. Further, any real property under the control of the Subrecipient that was acquired or improved
in whole or in part with CD BG funds in excess of $25,000 shall be: (a) used to meet one of the national
objectives set forth in Title 24 CFR 570.208, or any successor statute, until five (5) years after the
expiration or termination of the Agreement, or for such longer period of time as determined to be
appropriate by the City at its sole discretion; or (b) disposed of in a manner that results in the City's
being reimbursed in the amount of the current fair market value of real property less any portion of the
value attributable to expenditures of non-CDBG funds for acquisition of, or improvement to such real
property.
Independent Contractor:
The parties hereto in the performance of this Agreement will be acting in an independent capacity and
not as agents, employees, partners, joint venturers, or associates of one another. The employees or
agents of one party shall not be deemed or construed to be the agent or employees of the other party
for any purpose whatsoever.
19. Insurance:
20.
The Subrecipient shall neither commence work under this Agreement until it has obtained all insurance
required hereunder in a company or companies acceptable to the City nor shall the Subrecipient allow
any subcontractor to commence work on a subcontract until all insurance required of the subcontractor
has been obtained.
The Subrecipient shall agree to provide an acceptable certificate of insurance and endorsements
evidencing the coverage as specified in El Cajon City Council Policy D-3, Insurance Requirements,
which is attached hereto as Exhibit "D" and made a part of this Agreement. All insurance policies shall
be subject to approval by CITY as to form and content.
Subrecipient shall furnish properly executed certificates of insurance to CITY prior to commencement of
services under this Agreement. Such certificate shall:
A Clearly evidence all coverages required above, including specific evidence of a separate
endorsement naming CITY and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and
employees as additionally insureds;
B. Indicate whether coverage provided is on claims-made or occurrence basis;
C. Provide that such insurance shall not be materially changed, terminated, or allowed to expire
except on thirty (30) days prior written notice, via first class mail to CITY; and
D. Subrecipient agrees to provide CITY with copies of all required policies upon request.
Subrecipient shall also maintain Worker's Compensation Insurance (Exhibit "G") with statutory limits,
and employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than $2,000,000 per accident.
No Benefit to Arise to Local Employee:
No member, officer, or employee of the City, or its designees or agents, no member of the governing
body of the City, and no other public official who exercises any functions or responsibilities with respect
to the program during his or her tenure or for one year thereafter, shall have any interest, direct or
4
21.
indirect, in this Agreement or in any contract or subcontract, or the proceeds thereof, for work to be
performed in connection with the program assisted under this Agreement.
Certification Regarding Lobbying:
The Subrecipient certifies to the best of their knowledge and belief, that:
A. No Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid, by or on behalf of the
undersigned, to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of
any agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress in connection with the
awarding of any Federal contract, the making of any cooperative agreement, and the extension,
continuation, renewal, amendment, or modification of any Federal contract, grant, loan, or
cooperative agreement.
B. If any funds other than Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid to any person
for influencing or attempting to influence any officer or employee of any agency, a Member of
Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or any employee of a Member of Congress in
connection with this Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement, the undersigned
shall complete and submit Standard Form-LLL, "Disclosure Form to Report Lobbying," in
accordance with its instructions.
C. The Subrecipient shall require that the language of this certification be included in the award
documents for all sub-awards at all tiers (including subcontractors, sub-grantees, and contracts
under grants, loans, and cooperative agreements), and that all Subrecipients shall certify and
disclose accordingly.
22. Conflict of Interest:
A. Subrecipient covenants that neither it, nor any officer or principal of its firm, has or shall acquire
any interest, directly or indirectly, which would conflict in any manner with the interests of City or
which would in any way hinder Subrecipient's performance of services under this Agreement
Subrecipient further covenants that in the performance of this Agreement, no person having any
such interest shall be employed by it as an officer, employee, agent or subcontractor without the
express written consent of the City Manager. Subrecipient agrees to at all times avoid conflicts
of interest or the appearance of any conflicts of interest with the interests of City in the
performance of this Agreement (also see Exhibit "E").
B. City understands and acknowledges that Subrecipient is, as of the date of execution of this
Agreement, independently involved in the performance of non-related services for other
governmental agencies and private parties. Subrecipient is unaware of any stated position of
City relative to such projects. Any future position of City on such projects shall not be
considered a conflict of interest for purposes of this section.
23. Use of Funds for Entertainment or Gifts:
The Subrecipient certifies and agrees that it will not use funds provided through this Agreement to pay
for entertainment or gifts.
24. Joint Funding:
For programs in which there are sources of funds in addition to CDBG funds, the Subrecipient shall
provide proof of such funding. The City shall not pay for any services provided by the Subrecipient
which are funded by other sources. All restrictions and/or requirements provided in this Agreement
relative to accounting, budgeting, and reporting applies to the total program regardless of funding
sources.
25. Changes in Grant Allocation:
26.
The City reserves the right to reduce the grant allocation when the City's fiscal monitoring indicates that
the Subrecipient's rate of expenditure will result in unspent funds at the end of the program year.
Changes in the grant allocation will be done after consultation with the Subrecipient and approval by the
City Council. Such changes shall be incorporated into this Agreement by written amendments.
Fiscal Limitations:
The United States of America through HUD may in the future place programmatic or fiscal limitation(s)
on CDBG funds not presently anticipated. Accordingly, the City reserves the right to revise this
Agreement in order to comply with actions affecting HUD program funding. In the event of funding
5
reduction, the City may reduce the budget of the Agreement as a whole or as to cost category, and may
at its sole discretion, limit the Subrecipient's authority to commit and spend funds, and may restrict the
Subrecipient's use of both its uncommitted and unspent funds. Where HUD had directed or requested
the City to implement a reduction in funding, with respect to funding for this Agreement, the City
Manager or his/her designee may act for the City in implementing and effecting such a reduction in
revising the Agreement for such purpose. The City Manager or his/her designee may act for the City in
suspending the operation of the Agreement for up to sixty (60) days, upon three (3) days written notice
to the Subrecipient of his/her intention to so act. In no event, however, shall any revision made by the
City effect expenditures and legally binding commitments made by the Subrecipient before it received
notice of such revision, provided that such amounts have been committed in good faith and are
otherwise allowable and that such commitments are consistent with HUD cash withdrawal guidelines.
27. Purchase and Invoice Deadlines:
28.
29.
30.
Purchase of equipment or property must be completed before the last three (3) months of the initial
performance period and all equipment bills are to be paid before the last two (2) months of this period.
No expendable or non-expendable property or equipment is to be purchased during the final three (3)
months of the initial performance period unless approved by the City in writing. Invoices for all
obligations incurred under this Agreement must be submitted to the Redevelopment and Housing
Department within sixty (60) days after the initial performance period termination date or they may not
be honored. Exceptions to the preceding limitations require prior written approval by the City.
Invoices will not be honored unless and until periodic reports are current.
Non-expendable Property:
A record shall be maintained by the Subrecipient for each item of non-expendable property acquired
with CDBG funds. This record shall be provided to the City as well as being available for inspection and
audit by the City upon reasonable notice. Non-expendable property means tangible personal property
having a useful life of more than one (1) year and an acquisition cost of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or more per unit. The Subrecipient shall not purchase or agree to purchase non-expendable
property without the prior written approval of the City. Upon completion or early termination of this
Agreement, the City reserves the right to determine the final disposition of said non-expendable
property acquired for this program and CDBG funds in compliance with applicable laws and regulations.
Disposition may include, but is not limited to, the City taking possession of said non-expendable
property.
Expendable Personal Property:
Expendable personal property refers to all tangible personal property other than non-expendable
personal property. The Subrecipient shall not purchase or agree to purchase expendable personal
property with a unit value of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more per unit without the prior written
approval of the City.
Purchase or Lease of Non-Expendable Property or Equipment:
The Subrecipient shall obtain three documented bids prior to purchasing or leasing any non-expendable
personal property or equipment over one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in unit value. The Subrecipient
shall purchase or lease from the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. This inventory shall be
provided to the City as well as being available for inspection and audit upon reasonable notice at the
request of the City.
31. Travel and Conference Restrictions:
The Subrecipient certifies and agrees that travel and conference expenses will not be paid for by funds
provided through this Agreement.
32. Affirmative Action Policy:
The Subrecipient shall make a "good faith" effort to ensure that all projects funded wholly or in part by
CDBG funds shall provide equal employment and career advancement opportunities for minorities and
women. A "good faith" effort includes, but is not limited to, advertising in one or more minority or
women's publications; direct solicitations; and requesting assistance from minority and women
community organizations, contractor groups, local state or federal minority and women business
assistance office or other organizations that provide assistance to in the recruitment and placement of
minorities and women. In addition, the Subrecipient shall make every effort to employ residents of the
6
area and shall keep a record of the positions that have been created directly or as a result of this
program.
A Provision of Program Services
(1) The Subrecipient shall not on the ground of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual
orientation, disability or familial status exclude any person from participation in, deny
any person the benefits of, or subject any person to discrimination under any program
or activity funded in whole or in part with CDBG funds.
(2) The Subrecipient shall not under any program or activity funded in whole or in part with
CDBG funds, on the ground of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation,
disability, or familial status:
(a) Deny any facilities, services, financial aid or other benefits provided under the
program or activity.
(b) Provide any facilities, services, financial aid or other benefits which are different
or are provided in a different form from that provided to others under the
program or activity.
(c) Subject to segregated or separate treatment in any facility in, or in any manner
or process related to receipt of any service or benefit under the program or
activity.
(d) Restrict in any way access to, or in the enjoyment of any advantage or privilege
enjoyed by others in connection with facilities, services, financial aid, or other
benefits under the program or activity.
(e) Treat an individual differently from others in determining whether the individual
satisfies any admission, enrollment, eligibility, membership, or other
requirement or condition, which the individual must meet in order to be provided
any facilities, services, or other benefit provided under the program or activity.
(f) Deny an opportunity to participate in a program or activity as an employee.
(3) The Subrecipient may not utilize criteria or methods of administration which have the
effect of subjecting individuals to discrimination on the basis of race, color, national
origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or familial status or have the effect of defeating
or substantially impairing accomplishment of the objectives of the program or activity
with respect to individuals of a particular race, color, national origin, sex, sexual
orientation, disability, or familial status.
(4) The Subrecipient, in determining the site or location of housing or facilities provided in
whole or in part with CDBG funds, may not make the selections of such site or location
which have the effect of excluding individuals from, denying them the benefits of, or
subjecting them to discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual
orientation, disability, or familial status or which have the purpose or the effect of
defeating or substantially impairing the accomplishment of the objectives of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 and amendments thereto.
(5) (a) In administering a program or activity funded in whole or in part with CDBG
funds regarding which the Subrecipient has previously discriminated against
persons on the grounds of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation,
disability, or familial status, the Subrecipient must take affirmative actions to
overcome the effects of prior discrimination.
(b) Even in the absence of such prior discrimination the Subrecipient, in
administering a program or activity funded in whole in part with CDBG funds,
should take affirmative action to overcome the effects of conditions which would
otherwise result in limiting participation by persons of a particular race, color,
national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or familial status. Where
previous discriminatory practice or usage tends, on the grounds of race, color,
national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or familial status, to exclude
individuals from participation in, to deny them the benefits or, or to subject them
to discrimination under any program or activity to which CDBG funding applies,
7
B.
the Subrecipient has an obligation to take reasonable action to remove or
overcome the consequences of the prior discriminatory practice or usage, and
to accomplish the purpose of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and amendments
thereto.
(c) The Subrecipient shall not be prohibited by this part from taking any eligible
action to ameliorate an imbalance in services or facilities provided to any
geographic area or specific group of persons within its jurisdiction where the
purpose of such action is to overcome prior discriminatory practice or usage.
(6) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in Sections A(1 )-(5), nothing contained herein
shall be construed to prohibit the Subrecipient from maintaining or constructing
separate living facilities or rest room facilities for the different sexes. Furthermore,
selection on the basis of sex is not prohibited when institutional or custodial services
can properly be performed only by a member of the same sex as the recipients of the
services.
Employment Discrimination
(1) The Subrecipient shall not discriminate against any employee or applicant for
employment because of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or
familial status. The Subrecipient shall take affirmative action to ensure that applicants
are employed, and that employees are treated, during employment, without regard to
their race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or familial status.
Such action shall include, but not be limited to, the following: employment, upgrading,
demotion or transfer, recruitment or recruitment advertising, layoff or termination, rate of
pay or other forms of compensation and selection for training including apprenticeship.
The Subrecipient agrees to post in a conspicuous place available to employees and
applicants for employment, notices setting forth the provisions of this nondiscrimination
clause.
(2) The Subrecipient shall, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by or
on behalf of the Subrecipient, state that all qualified applicants will receive consideration
for employment without regards to race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation,
disability, or familial status.
(3) The Subrecipient shall send to each labor union or representative of workers with whom
it has a collective bargaining agreement or other contract or understanding, a notice to
be provided by the City's contracting officers advising the labor union or workers'
representative of the Subrecipient's commitments under Section 202 of Executive Order
No. 11246 of September 24, 1965, and shall post copies of the notice in conspicuous
places available to employees and applicants for employment.
(4) The Subrecipient shall comply with all provisions of Executive Order 11246 of
September 24, 1965, and of the rules, regulations, and relevant orders of the Secretary
of Labor.
(5) The Subrecipient shall furnish to the City all information and reports required by
Executive Order No. 11246 of September 24, 1965, and by the related rules,
regulations, and orders.
(6) In the event of the Subrecipient's failure to comply with any rules, regulations, or orders
required to be complied with pursuant to this Agreement, the City may cancel,
terminate, or suspend in whole or in part its performance and the Subrecipient may be
declared ineligible for further government contracts in accordance with the procedures
authorized in Executive Order No. 11246 of September 24, 1965, or by rule, regulation,
or order of the Secretary of Labor, or as otherwise provided by law.
(7) The Subrecipient shall include the provisions of the "Affirmative Action Policy,"
Paragraphs B.(1) through (6), above, in every subcontract or purchase order unless
exempted by rules, regulations, or order of the Secretary of Labor, issued pursuant to
Section 204 of Executive Order No. 11246 of September 24, 1965, so that such
provisions will be binding upon each subcontractor or vendor.
8
The Subrecipient shall take such action with respect to any subcontract or purchase
order as the City may direct as a means of enforcing such provisions including
sanctions for noncompliance; provided, however, that in the event the Subrecipient
becomes involved in, or is threatened with, litigation with a subcontractor or vendor as a
result of such direction by the City, the Subrecipient may request the United States to
enter into such litigation to protect the interests of the United States.
(8) The Subrecipient shall not discriminate on the basis of age in violation of any provision
of the Age Discrimination Act of 1975 (42 U.S.C. 6101 et seq.) or with respect to any
otherwise qualified disabled individual as provided in Section 504 of the Rehabilitation
Act of 1973 (29 U.S. C. 794). The Subrecipient shall also provide ready access to and
use of all CD BG funds assisted buildings to physically disabled persons in compliance
with the standards established in the Architectural Barriers Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. 4151
et seq.) and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1992.
33. Religious Proselytizing or Political Activities:
34.
The Subrecipient agrees that it will not perform or permit any religious proselytizing or political activities
in connection with the performance of this Agreement. Funds under this agreement will be used
exclusively for performance of the services required under this Agreement and no funds shall be used to
promote any religious or political activities. Further in accordance with 24 CFR 570.200U), et. seq., the
Subrecipient shall not:
A Engage in inherently religious activities, such as worship, religious instruction, or proselytization,
as part of the programs or services funded under this part. If an organization conducts such
activities, the activities must be offered separately, in time or location, from the programs or
services funded under this part, and participation must be voluntary for the beneficiaries of the
HUD-funded programs or services;
B. Use direct CD BG funds to support any inherently religious activities, such as worship, religious
instruction, or proselytization;
C. Discriminate against a program beneficiary or prospective program beneficiary on the basis of
religion or religious beliefs;
D. Use CD BG funds for the acquisition, construction, or rehabilitation of structures to the extent
that those structures are used for inherently religious activities,
Faith Based Organizations:
Notwithstanding Paragraph 33 above, if Subrecipient is a Faith Based Organization, Subrecipient
agrees to abide by Executive Order 13279, as promulgated at 24 CFR 5.109, et. seq.
35. Alterations, Encumbrances, Mechanics' Liens:
The Subrecipient agrees that it will not make, or suffer to be made, any alterations to the CDBG funded
improvements, the property or any part thereof, without the prior written consent of the City. The
Subrecipient shall keep the property free from any encumbrances or liens arising out of any work
performed, material furnished, or obligations incurred by the Subrecipient. The Subrecipient agrees to
submit performance, and labor and materials bonds on any improvements over $5,000.00.
36. Notices:
All notices, memoranda, reports, drafts, and communications shall be served in writing. The notices
shall be sent to the following addresses.
City
Community Development - Housing
City of El Cajon
200 Civic Center Way
El Cajon, CA 92020
9
Subrecipient
East .County Transitional Living Center,
Inc.
Attn: Harold H. Brown,
Chief Executive Officer
1527 East Main Street
El Cajon, CA 92021
37.
38.
39.
Amendments: Variations:
This writing with attachments embodies the whole of the Agreement of the parties hereto. There are no
oral Agreements not contained herein, except as herein provided, addition or variation of the terms of
this Agreement shall not be valid unless made in the form of a written amendment to the Agreement
formally approved and executed by the City Council.
Savings Clause:
If any provision of this Agreement is found to be invalid, void, or unenforceable, the remaining
provisions shall, insofar as reasonably possible, continue in full force in effect without being impaired or
invalidated in any way.
Exhibit(s):
The Exhibits to this Agreement are an integral part of this Agreement and have each been incorporated
herein.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have caused this Agreement to be executed as of the day and year first
written above.
CITY OF EL CAJON, A municipal corporation,
By
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
10
EXHIBIT "A"
SCOPE OF WORK AND B U DG ET
Project: Railing Replacement at 1527 E. Main Street
Contact Person: Harold H. Brown, Chief Executive Officer (619-977-0633)
Statement of Work: The Subrecipient agrees to use the Community Development Block Grant funds
allocated by the City for Fiscal Year 2020-2021 to provide the Railing Replacement at 1527 E. Main Street
Program/Project in the City of El Cajon.
Section 1 - Work Description:
(To be completed by Subrecipient-must reflect work activities approved by City Council)
􀀒 /v--􀀓-bd-R, 􀀔 J 􀀕 °o""􀀖 ...., (3) 􀀚tCW" ,. e af
a. "'0e:tl 􀃹 . ) <S
Section 2 - Records and Reporting
The Subrecipient shall submit a Periodic Performance Report, which shall become Exhibit "C" hereto, for the
previous reporting period. Reporting periods may be monthly or quarterly, at the Subrecipient's option, but must
remain consistent throughout the year. Periodic Performance Reports are due by the 10th of the month following
the reporting period. These reports shall include the following information:
A Number of individual clients served (individual client may be a person or a household)
B. Race of clients served
C. Ethnicity of clients served (Hispanic, yes or no - a person may be of any race and be Hispanic)
D. Number of disabled clients served (as defined by the Social Security Administrative Guidelines)
E. Whether or not the head of the household is female
F. Number of clients who are low income (per HUD guidelines)
G. Whether or not the client is an El Cajon resident.
H. Number of new clients assisted.
In addition, a brief narrative (Exhibit "C-2") must accompany the report. Narrative should include (but is not
limited to) the following:
A Progress and status of the capital/public facility project;
B. Progress made toward goals as evidenced in Exhibit "A", or an explanation of lack thereof.
C. Any other accomplishments or problems/concerns the Agency wishes to report.
Section 3 - Kiil Program Goals and Timeline In addition􀃺 East County Transitional Living Center, Inc. will
provide
􀃻.....,..\􀃼
( :).:Si:> ) individuals with
s􀃽l,:s in 􀃾y of 􀃿period of July 1, 2020 to June 30, 2021.
Section 4 - Budget
The City agrees to pay Subrecipient a total sum of Twenty Five Thousand and no/100s ($25,000.00) to assist
in the completion of improvements and provision of the above mentioned services. It is further agreed that no
funding shall be disbursed unless the Subrecipient is in full compliance with the provisions of this Agreement.
The City shall make payment of these funds on a reimbursement basis contingent upon a written request and
submittal of receipts or appropriate proof of payment from the Subrecipient. Payments will not be paid unless
and until periodic reports are current. Payments may be made on a monthly or quarterly basis, at the
Subrecipient's option.
EXHIBIT "A-2"
ACQUISITION/CONSTRUCTION/REHABILITATION PROGRAM BU DGET
PROJECT TITLE Railing Replacement at 1527 E. Main Street
This schedule must be completed when the proposed capital project involves acquisition, construction and/or
rehabilitation of a public facility. The project budget should include permits, utility installation, relocation and
engineering and architectural services (if applicable). City Department applicants must ensure the matching
funds are earmarked in their departmental budget. Exhibit B must be completed to document the sources of
matching funds and gap financing.
MATCH ING FUNDS
Cost Component
CDBG Funding Other Cash In-kind Total Project
Request Resources Contributions Budget
LAND
Appraisals
Legal Services
Land Acquisition
Real Estate Services
Other (specify)
Total Land Cost
PROFESS IONAL
SERVICES
Architects (Required)
Asbestos Survey
(Required)
Archeological
Monitoring
Other (Specify)
Total P rofess ional
Services
Construction
Site Improvements
Labor5 &>iooo
Material l 'J.. 000
Equipment6 ?-000
Fees and Permits7 -:2-000
Total Construction
Costs
Relocation
Assistance8
TOTAL PROJECT
BUDGET
?-51 000 -,5"', 000
5 Davis-Bacon Wage Regulations will affect Construction/Rehabilitation project costs. Check with staff for wage determination.
6 Attach list itemizing proposed acquisition of built in equipment. Equipment that is not an integral structural fixture is generally not
eligible for purchase with CDBG funds.
7 Include costs for development and permit fees payable to the City of El Cajon in connection with a project.
8 Relocation costs apply when individuals or businesses are displaced as result of your acquisition, new construction or
renovation project. Please check with staff for relocation cost factors.
FY2020-2021 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT PROGRAM
REQUEST FOR PAYMENT
**NOTE: To request Electronic Version of this form, send an e-mail to jkasviki@cityofelcajon.us
EXH IBIT "B"
This Request for Payment is presented to the City of El Cajon to obtain reimbursement for the operation of the Project named below for the Payment Period listed below. The payment is
requested for the portion of the contract budget stated in Column B.
SUBRECIPIENT &o-t Co'---􀀛'f 􀀜􀀝􀀞􀀟 L􀀇" 􀁊'5 C-.-L
PA YMENT PERIOD
PREPARED BY
FY 2020-21
Job Title
Job Title
Job Title
Salaries & Wages
Payroll Taxes
Fringe Benefits
PERSONNEL
Office Suplies
Postage
Rent and Utilities
Telephone
Other
Other
Other
Other
Other
NON-PERSONNEL
(TOTAL PROGRAM
Contract
Budget
$0
$0
$0
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
Balance
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
Name
JUL
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
AUG
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
PROJECT
TOTAL PAYMENT
-- Phone
SEP OCT NOV
Total Total Total
$0.00 $0.00 $0.00
$0.00 $0.00 $0.00
$0.00 $0.00 $0.00
$0.00 $0.00 $0.00
G􀀉􀀊M-- 􀀋 {2a,􀀇M.12--7 ?"bi􀀅t-
DEC I JAN I FEB 1 = I APR I MAY I JUN
Total Total To􀁉) Total Total Total
.
$0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00
$0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00
-...----,-,
$0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00
$0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00
I hereby certify the above expenditures were incurred in carrying out the objective of the project contract, are authorized in the approved contract budget, and that contracted services were
performed in accordance with the Agreement.
Date Signature & Title of Subrecipient Executive
CITY O F EL CAJON EXH I B IT "C"
C O M M U 1 -. , i'Y DEVELOPMENT B LOC K GRANT 1-t{OGRAM
P E RIODIC PERFORMANCE RE PORT
FY Period Reported: FY 2020-2021 Quarter/Month Reported: _____________ Agency Name: __t_ C._'TL-_C..._ __________ Reporter's Name: _________________
Program Name:G"'-J􀂄 'iaePC<-4.P 􀀠 f Phone Number: _________________ _
Numbers served must reflect number of Persons (Pl served. Number of Households (H) served may only be reported with prior
approval of the Redevelopment & Housing Division.
Please indicate (P) or (H) : ______________ Annual City Grant Amount: _____________ 1 . TOTAL
White
Black / African American
Asian
American Indian / Alaskan
Native
Native Hawaiian / Other
Pacific Islander
American Indian / Alaskan
Native and White
Asian and White
Black / African American
and White
American Indian / Alaskan
Native & Black / African
American
Other/Multi-Racial
2. TOTAL
Extremely Low Income
(0-30% MFI)
Low Income
(>30-50% MFI)
Moderate Income
(>50-80% MFI)
Income above 80% MFI
3. TOTAL
Homeless
Female Headed Households
Disabled/Special Needs
(A)
Number of Persons
served with El Cajon's
CDBG funding this
Quarter/Month
Total # Each Race
(8)
How many in Column
(A) reported as
Hispanic (this
Quarter/Month for Each
Race)?
Total # of Hispanics
Each Race
(C)
Cumulative number of (D)
Persons served
Year-To-Date How many in Column
(July 1 to end of (C) reported as
current report period) Hispanic Year-To-Date?
Total # Each Race Total # of Hispanics
Year-to-Date Each Race Year-to-Date
IMPORTANT-PLEASE NOTE: 1) Hispanic is no longer considered a race, but an ethnicity and must be reported separately. A
member of any race must also report as Hispanic or Non-Hispanic. "Other" is for mufti-racial reports only and must be identified in
the narrative report. 2) Totals for fines 1, 2, and 3 must match each other for each column. 3) List only undupficated program
participants-clients receiving continued services from previous fiscal year may be counted only once during the new contract year.
4) A narrative report must accompany this form. The narrative should include the definition of "Persons Served" (typically El Cajon
residents) and should reflect all additional data collected as agreed in the contract such as Number of Families served, Number of
Projects Completed, Number of Program Hours provided, Number of Bed Nights provided, or other Performance Outcome
Measurements. For questions, please calf the Housing Division at (61 9) 441 -1 786.
Rev. 06/1 3/201 4 h:lrh\cdbg-home\yr46-2020 • 2021\agreements with subs\exhibits b c c-2 and dlexhibit c - periodic program report_20-2 l .doc
CDBG LOW M )CLIENTELE NATIONAL OBJECTIVE REPf
• 􀁂DERAL FISCAL YEAR 2020-2021
PROJECT STATUS NARRATIVE
EXH I B I T "C-2"
The purpose of this form is to report accomplishment data for the project named below. This form must be completed for proj ects providing
eligible CDBG/HOME activities to Low to Moderate Income residents of the City of El Cajon. This form must be completed and submitted
with each monthly/quarterly Periodic Performance Rep01i.
AGENCY NAME:
PROJECT NAME:
REPORTING PERIOD:
PREPARED BY:
PROJECT STATUS : Pending O
PROJECT STATUS NARRATIVE:
NAME
Active O Complete O
PHONE
Date: -------
SUBJ ECT :
REFEREN C E :
PURPOSE
C ITY O F EL CAJ O N
CITY C O U N C I L POLICY
I n s u ra n ce Requ i rements
Adopted 7 /26/94
Amended 1 1 /29/05
Amended 04/1 4/1 5
EXHI BIT D
POLICY
D-3
E F FECTIVE PAGE
04/1 4/1 5 1 of 8
To provide a u niform City policy for liability i nsurance requirements a nd to establish procedures for
its con siste n t application.
BACKGROU N D
To help p rotect the C ity against liability, a l l i n d ividuals, contractors , agencies a n d organizations
cond u cting b u si ness in association with , on behalf of, or in certai n circumstances within the City of
El Cajon are requ i red to mainta i n adequate liability insura nce coverage acceptable to the C ity.
Because of the d iffering levels of protection needed for various activities conducted within the City,
the City has esta blished policy limits and standards which directly relate to the type of activity
being con d u cted .
POLICY
All ind ividuals, contractors, agencies, and organ izations conducting business either for the City of
El Cajon (or the Successor Agency to the El Cajon Redevelopment Agency) or pursuant to a n
ord ina nce , resolution , agreement or policy req u iring t h e maintenance o f liab ility insurance shall
provide p roof of liability insurance i n the following amounts and written on a n occurrence basis
(claims made coverage will be accepted o n ly after verifying that occurrence coverage is not
availab le) :
1 . A combined single l imit policy with aggregate limits in the amount of $2 million for all
construction projects and for carnivals, subdivisions, and pollution coverage subject to
section 5.c. unde r the heading " I N S U RANCE STANDARDS," with a m􀆳ximum deductible
or self-in s u rance retention ("SI R") of $500,000; for policies n ot having a "combined single
limit," minimum limits i n amounts as follows :
Commercial General Liability (CGL): Insura n ce Services Office Form CG 00 0 1 covering
CGL on a n "occu rrence" basis, including products and completed operations, property
damage, bodily i njury and personal & advertising injury with limits n o less than $ 1 ,000,000
per o ccurrence. If a general aggregate limit applies , eithe r the general aggregate limit shall
apply separately to this project/location or the general aggregate limit shall be twice the
requ i red occurren ce limit.
U n less staff d etermines that circumstances (i.e. high risk project, etc.) require the higher
limit, the $2 ,000, 000 limit shall be decreased to $ 1 , 000,000 with a maximum deductible o r
S I R of $ 1 50,000, whe n :
SUBJ ECT :
REFEREN C E :
CITY OF EL CAJ O N
CITY C O U N C I L P OLICY
I nsurance Requirements
Adopted 7 /26/94
Amended 1 1 / 29/05
Amended 04/1 4/1 5
POLIC Y
D-3
EFFECTIVE PAG E
04/1 4/1 5 2 of 8
a. The public improvements portion of a subdivision project is less than $50,000; or
b. A construction p roject (in accordance with the Standard Specifications for Public
Works Construction-and the Standard Special Provisions, the "Green Book") is for
less than $50,000.
2. Except as otherwise p rovided in this policy, a com b ined s ingle limit policy with aggregate
limits in the amount of $2 million for all others, including, b ut n ot limited to, athletic leagues,
recreation g roups, towing compan ies and public service agencies; for policies not having a
"co m bined sin gle limit," minimum limits in amounts as follows:
Commercial General Liability (CGL): Insura n ce Services Office Form CG 00 01 covering
CGL on an "occurre n ce" basis, including p roducts and completed operations, property
damage, bodily i njury and personal & advertising i njury with limits n o less than $ 1 , 000,000
per occu rrence. If a general aggregate limit applies, either the general aggregate limit shall
apply separately to this project/location or the general aggregate limit shall be twice the
req u i red occurren ce lim it.
3 . A combined single limit policy with aggregate limits i n the amou nt o f $250,000 for
homeowners insura n ce or $500,000 for commercial general liability insurance for small
business owners, in either event only where the insurance is required for work i n the public
right-of-way. "Small business owners" are defi ned as commercial b usinesses, or a
professional or administrative office uses, where the owners of the b usiness work on-site
as their primary calling or vocation , and having no more than two (2) employees not related
by blood or marriage.
4 . Selected high-risk activities that would otherwise fall under the criteria for category 2 s hall
be evaluated by staff o n a case-by-case basis to determine whether or not the above limits
are s ufficient. The imposition of liability limits exceeding $2 million for s uch high -risk
activities is appealable to the C ity Council.
5 . $ 1 ,000,000 for taxicab companies.
6 . $500, 000 or actual value, whichever i s greater, for "valuable papers" and "in tran sit"
insura n ce where C ity records or personal property is being transported or stored outside of
C ity p roperty.
EXHIBIT D
SUBJECT :
REF ERE N C E :
C I TY O F EL CAJ O N
C I TY C O U N C I L POLICY
I n surance Requirements
Adopted 7 /26/94
Amended 1 1 /29/05
Amended 04/14/1 5
POLICY
D-3
EFFECTIVE PAG E
04/1 4/1 5 3 of 8
7. Exceptions to the above limits may be made for non-profit, charitable, political, commu nity
and religious organizations.
8 . The policy o r policies o f insura n ce may be for a l l operations or activities o f the party
purchasing the policy or policies provided, h owever, that the City or the Successor Agency
may req uire a separate policy exclusively for operations of the p u rchaser where the C ity
Manager, i n h is or her sole d iscretion , determines that a s ingle policy would be inadequate
to protect the City or Successor Agen cy in the event of multiple catastrophes.
9 . Workers' compensation insura n ce shall meet the m in imum limits requ ired b y law.
INSURAN C E STANDARDS
1 . ADM ITTED CARRI E R / B EST'S RATING A, C LASS VII
a. I n s u rers must be "admitted" carriers pursuant to the provisions of the Califo rn i a
Insurance Code and i n accordance with a l l requirements o f the State I nsura n ce
Commission a n d must be listed i n the:
"OFFICIAL P U B L I CATI O N
D E PARTM E NT OF I N S U RANCE
STATE O F CAL I F OR N IA
45 Fremont Street
San Francisco, California 941 05
I N SU RANCE ORGAN IZATIONS AUTHORIZED BY TH E I N S U RANCE
COMM ISSION TO TRANSACT B U S I N ESS OF I NS U RANCE
IN THE STATE OF CAL I FO R N IA D U R I N G
[the most recent year for wh ich
the publication is available]."
or
"California Department of I n su ra nce Company Profile."
SUBJ ECT :
CITY OF EL CAJON
CITY COUNCIL POLICY
I n s u ra n ce Requirements
EXHIBIT D
POLICY
D-3
REFERENC E : Adopted 7 /26/94 E FFECTIVE PAGE
Amended 1 1 /29/05
Amended 04/1 4/1 5 04/1 4/1 5 4 of 8
b. I nsurers m ust have a Best's rating of A , Class VII o r h igher (this rating includes
those insurers with a minimum policyholder's surplus of $50 to $ 1 00 million).
Exceptions to the Best's rating may be considered when an insurance carrier meets
all other standards and can satisfy s u rplus amounts equivalent to an A, Class V I I
rating. An exception t o the rating req uirement may be made for the California State
Compensation I nsurance Fund if n ot rated.
2 . NON-ADM ITTED CARRIER / BEST'S RATING A , Class XI I
Exceptions to the "admitted" requirement may be considered when a non-admitted
insura nce carrier meets all other standard s herein and:
a. is either (i) listed in:
California Department of I nsurance
List of Approved S u rplus Line Insurers
LISTING OF F I LINGS
or (ii) is currently a party to co-operation agreements with foreign insura n ce
reg u latory authorities acceptable to the City Manager or C ity Attorney (for example,
for insu rers located in the U nited Kingdom, agreements m ust be with both the
Prudential Regu latory Authority ("PRA") and the Financial Conduct Authority ("FCA"),
or such successor authority or authorities of PRA and FCA;
b. either the carrier or its parent company has a Best's rating of A, Class VI I (this rating
include those insurers with a minimum policyholder's surplus of $50 to $1 00 millio n ;
c. has ten years or more experience in the business of insurance ; and
d. if applicable, the reinsura n ce carrier has a qualified rating.
3 . G ENERAL - I NS U RANCE CERTI F I CATES / ADDITIONAL INSURED
All insurers (including those insuring against pollution or d ischarges of hazard ous
materials) must p rovide certificates of insurance and endorsements evidencing coverage
prior to the start of any contract. All certificates or endorsements must include:
S U BJECT :
CITY OF EL CAJ O N
CI TY C O U N C I L POLICY
Insura nce Req u irements
EXH I B IT D
POLICY
D-3
REFEREN C E : Adopted 7 /26/94 E FFECTIVE PAGE
Amended 1 1 / 29/05
Amended 04/1 4/1 5
• Name of insura n ce company issuing each policy.
04/1 4/1 5 5 of 8
All insurers must provide a n original endorsement naming the C ity of El Cajon
(and/or the Successor Agency to the El Cajon Redeve lopment Agen cy), and its
(their) elected and appointed officials, officers, employees and volunteers (for
purposes of this Policy, i n dividually a n d c o llective ly, t h e "C ity I n s u red s") as
additio n a l i n s u re d s . T h i s i n c l u s i o n a s additional insureds shall not be required of
Workers' Compensation or professional liability policies of i nsurance , and may be
waived for "valuable papers" coverage with the approval of the City Attorney.
• All insurers must provide an original endorsement stating that the insura nce
coverage shall be primary i nsurance as respects the C ity of El Cajon (and/or the
Successor Agen cy to the El Cajon Redevelopment Agency), and its (their) elected
and appointed officials, officers, employees and volunteers (for purposes of th is
Policy, individ u ally and collectively, the "City Insureds. Any insura nce or selfinsurance
mainta ined by the E ntity, its officers, officials, employees, or volunteers
shall be excess of the Contractor's insurance and shall n ot contribute with it.
• Waiver of Subrogation endorsement is required on Workers' Compensation.
C overage.
• Address of named insure d .
• Description of coverage, including any special coverage required by the contract.
• Policy n u mbers .
• Policy periods (If claims made basis, must i n clude retroactive date and length of
time allowed as extended reporting period) .
• Coverage type (occurrence form vs. claims made).
• Authorized sig nature and date of issuance. An original signature is required : a
d igital signature is acceptable so long as it complies with the requirements of
Government Code § 1 6 . 5 .
• U n less approved by the City Manager or designee, no certificate shall be accepted
that qualifies the obligation of the carrier to provide 30 days written notice of
cancellation of the policy. With the approval of the C ity Attorney the obligati o n to
provide n otice of cancellation may be reduced to ten (1 0) days , but only for
termination d u e to the non-payment of any p remium.
SUBJECT :
REFERENC E :
C I TY O F EL CAJON
CITY C O U N C I L P O LICY
I n surance Requirements
Adopted 7 /26/94
Amended 1 1 /29/05
Amended 04/1 4/1 5
EXH I B IT D
POLICY
D-3
EFFECTIVE PAG E
04/1 4/1 5 6 of 8
4 . P U B L IC WORKS PROJECTS
In addition to the standards set forth above, insurance policies for public works projects
m ust also meet the following insura nce requirements set out in the most recent edition of
the G reen Book adopted by the C ity Council:
a. All insurance certificates shall bear a n endorsement or s hall have attached a rider
whereby it is provided that, in the event of expiration or proposed cancellation of
such policy for any reason whatsoever, the City shall be n otified by certified mail,
return receipt requested , g iving a sufficient time before the date thereof to comply
with any applicable law or statute, but in no event less than th irty (30) days before
expiration or cancellation is effective, the provisions of section 3 herein
n otwithstanding; and
b. Compliance with Labor Code §§3700 a n d 3800 relating to Workers' Compensatio n .
c . Requirements o f the G reen Book shall p revail.
5. PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
An applicant for permit(s) to do work within the public right-of-way may establish
satisfactory p roof of liability insurance in the following manner:
a . CONTRACTORS
Contractors must furnish the City with a certificate of liability insurance, which meets
the req uirements set forth above and any other City requ irements contained in th is
policy.
b . HOMEOWN E RS / PROPERTY OWN ERS
Homeowners/Property owners requesting a permit to do work within City rights-ofway
or easements immediately adjacent to their respective owned or occupied
property, solely for the owner's personal benefit, shall be required to furnish the City
with a copy of their homeowner's/property owner's liability insurance policy, which
meets the req u irements set forth above, with the min imum limits described in
category 3 u nder the heading " POLICY," above. The policy must be effective d u ring
the entire period of the proposed work, plus two (2) calendar years, and m u st
p rovide coverage for claims arising from the work performed, or improvements
owned , by the homeowner in the right-of-way or easement. If the encroachment is
SUBJ ECT :
REFEREN C E :
C I TY OF EL CAJON
CITY C O U N C I L POLICY
I n su ra nce Requ irements
Adopted 7 /26/94
Amended 1 1 /29/05
Ame nded 04/1 4/1 5
EXH I BIT D
POLICY
D-3
EFFECTIVE PAGE
04/1 4/1 5 7 of 8
ongoing , a n n u al proof of insurance s h a l l be req uired. The requirement to name the
City as a n additio nal insured, and the req u irement for a policy for two (2) additional
ca lendar yea rs , may each be waived by the C ity Council o r the City Manager (or her
designee) i n cases of extreme h a rdship, in their d iscretion.
c. POLLUTI O N EXC L U S I O N
Application s for t h e insta llation o f mon itoring wells for the evaluation o f groundwater
pollution or for the discha rge of formerly polluted gro u n dwater into the City sewer
system m u st be accompan ied by a certificate of liability insurance provided by the
property owner. Such liability insurance may not contain a pollution exclusion clause
and must explicitly indemn ify the City aga inst all hazards wh ich may resu lt from
either of these activities, including a worsening of pollution, either within the
subsurface adjacent to the original pollution or within the City sewer system.
If the property owner is u nable to provide ins u rance which addresses both genera l
liability a n d pol lution liability, the enviro n me ntal compa ny or other appropriately
qualified e ntity contracting with the property own e r for either monitoring wel l
installation o r g ro u ndwater pollution remediatio n , m a y fu rnish pollution liability
insurance on beha lf of the property owner.
Any i nsura n ce approved u nder this s ubsection c. shall be an occurrence policy, and
shall otherwise comply with the provisions of this Policy.
d. PU BLIC UTI L IT I ES
This policy as it relates to work in the p u blic rig hts-of-way shall not be applicable to
Cable TV, Helix Water District, Padre Dam M u n icipal Water District, SBC, S a n
Diego G a s & E lectric, o r any other p ublic utility.
e. TRANSPORTATION / OVERSIZE LOADS - P ERMITS - See Ch apter 1 0 .24 of the
El Cajon M u n icipal Code.
SUBJECT :
REFEREN C E :
CITY O F EL CAJON
CITY COUNCIL POLICY
I n surance Requirements
Adopted 7 /26/94
Amended 1 1 /29/05
Amended 04/1 4/1 5
TIME LIM ITS / CANCELLATION PROVISIONS
EXH I BIT D
POLICY
D-3
E FF ECTIVE PAGE
04/1 4/1 5 8 of 8
All lia b ility insura n ce req u i red pursuant to this policy shall provide coverage for a sufficient time
period to p rotect the C ity from liability. The insurer is req uired to provide a minimum of thirty (30)
d ays-notice of cancellation of any policy. With the approval of the City Attorney (except as
provided i n section 4, herein) this obligation may be reduced to not less than ten ( 1 0) days written
n otice, but only for termination d u e to the non-payment of a ny premiu m . In no event shall a policy
be accepted wh ich termi nates prior to the completion of the activity to be covered.
In certain circumstances, it may be impracticable to obtain contin uing insurance coverage due to
the du ration of the activity or the cost of premature renewal. U n de r such circumstances , a n
exception to the coverage period may b e made s o long as the policy i s renewed o r replaced with
a n acceptable insura nce carrier and there is no lapse in coverage. Maintenance of proper
insurance coverage is a material term of any contract with the City a n d failure to mainta i n or
renew coverage o r to p rovide evide n ce of renewal may be treated as a material breach of
contract.
ALTERNATIVE RISK MANAGEMENT PRACTICES; S ELF-INSURANCE; RISK-POOLING
Alternative risk management practices, such as self-insurance, risk pooling, risk retention groups,
and other such programs, will be accepted i n lieu of commercial insurance policies provided that
the coverage meets the requirements of this Policy. Any such a lternative risk management
practices must meet the fin ancial strength and s u rplus requirements reflected by the Best's
Ratings req u ired of commercial insurance under this Policy.
I NS U RA N C E CH EC KLIST
Acceptable insurance certificates must meet the following requirements:
If Insurance Company is an Adm itted Carrier:
□ Best's rating of A VI I or better
□ Lice nsed in the State of California OR l isted as S u rp l u s
I f Insurance Company is a N on-Adm itted Carrier:
□ I ncluded on the Californ ia Department of I nsurance List of Approved Surp l u s Line
I ns u rers (LAS LI)
http://www.insurance.ca.gov
□ Best's Rating of at least a A VI I
□ Has 1 0 years or more experience
□ If a p plicable, the reinsurance carrier has a qualified rating
Requ i rements for all carriers :
Amou nt listed on policy m ust be an agg regate amount of $2,000, 000 un less determ ined by
authorized staff that the amount can be red uced to $ 1 , 00 0 , 000 per Policy D-3.
P rovide a n orig inal sign atu re OR electronic signatu re on emailed certificates (stam ped and
faxed signatures are NOT acceptable) .
I nclude specific description of p roject or job req uiring coverage on the certificate.
P rovide endorsement page specifically naming the City of El Cajon as additional insured
to i nclude the following language: "City of El Cajon (and/or the Successor Agency to the El
Cajon Redevelopment Agency), its (their) elected and appointed officials, officers, employees
and volunteers (for purposes of this Policy, individually and collectively, the 'City Insureds') . "
A blanket endorsement is NOT acceptable.
Per Policy D-3, City shall be notified of expiration or p roposed cancellation of insura n ce policy
not less tha n 30 days before expiration or cancellation is effective. Public Works p rojects
using G reen Book s pecifications req u i re notification of expiration o r p ro posed cancellation of
insura nce policy not less than 30 days before expiration or cancellation is effective by certified
m a i l , retu rn receipt req uested (non-payment can be 1 0 days) .
P rofessional Services Ag reement compan ies m ust p rovide evidence of P rofessional Liability
and Worker Compensation coverage.
I/Insurance/Checklist Eff. 1 1 -29-05
EXHIBIT "E"
DECLARATION OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS
In submitting its proposal, SUBRECIPIENT represents that SUBRECIPIENT's responses to the
following questions are true and correct:
1. The proposed public project may affect the market value of real property in the vicinity of the project
site.
a. Does the SUBRECIPIENT or anyone in the SUBRECIPIENT's organization Yes No
have a financial interest in real property located within 2500 feet of the □ 􀁋 project site?
b. Has the SUBRECIPIENT or anyone in the SUBRECIPIENT's organization,
rendered professional services concerning real property located within 2500
.􀀅 feet of the project site? □
C. Has the SUBRECIPIENT or anyone in the SUBRECIPIENT's organization
received income from real property that is located within 2500 feet of the
project site? □ 􀁌
2. The proposed project may affect businesses in the vicinity of the project site.
a. Does the SUBRECIPIENT or anyone in the SUBRECIPIENT's organization
have a financial interest in a business located within 2500 feet of the project
site? □ 􀁍
b. Has the SUBRECIPIENT or anyone in the SUBRECIPIENT's organization
rendered professional services concerning a business that is located within 2500 feet of the project site? □ 􀁎
C. Has the SUBRECIPIENT or anyone in the SUBRECIPIENT's organization
received income from a business that is located within 2500 feet of the
project site? □ R'"
3. Does anyone in SUBRECIPIENT's organization have a spouse or other family member who has a financial interest in any such real property or business? □ 􀁏
SUBRECIPIENT'S SIGNATURE
East County Transitional Living Center, Inc.
igned by an individual clearly authorized to bind SUBRECIPIENT.
Date:
EXH IBIT "F"
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
WITH 2 CFR PART 200, SUBPART F (FORMERLY 0MB CIRCULAR A-1 33)
AUDITS OF STATES, LOCAL GOVERNMENTS AND
NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS
CFDA No. for this Grant/Agreement: 1 4.21 8 (Community Development Block Grant)
Non-Federal entities that expend $750, 000 or more in a year in Federal awards shall have a single or programspecific
audit conducted for that year in accordance with the provisions of 2 CFR Part 200, Subpart F. Please
complete the following by placing an "X" in the appropriate box.
□ expended $750,000 or more i n
Federal funds during the prior fiscal year (FY 20 1 9-20/calendar year (20 1 9).
􀀈 o.a,-Ct>u,..􀀉 \-¥-s:-+􀀆 L,'v􀀈 fu , did not expend $750,000 or more in
Federal funds during the prior fiscal year (FY 201 9-20)/calendar year (20 1 9).
I HEREBY CERT I FY I have the authority to sign for the above named agency and that the agency will comply
with the provisions of 0MB Circular A-1 33 and any other applicable Federal and State laws and regulations
hereinafter enacted.
By: 4-􀀂􀀃
1!/-wo1J l){l)l>...f ,J
Print Name
Title:
Date:
EXH IBIT "G"
WORKER'S COMPENSATION INSURANCE CERTIFICATE
The Subrecipient shall execute the following form as required by the California Labor Code,
Sections 1860 and 1861.
I am aware of the provision of Section 3700 of the Labor Code which requires every employer to
be insured against liability for worker's compensation or to undertake self-insurance in
accordance with the provisions of that code, and I will comply with such provisions before
commencing the performance of the work of this contract.
East County Transitional Living Center, Inc.
By: