I I
GRANT AGREEMENT BETWEEN
THE CITY OF SANTEE
AND
HOME START, INC.
FOR USE OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT
CORONAVIRUS FUNDS
FISCAL YEAR 2020-2021
THIS GRANT AGREEMENT (the "Agreement") is made and entered into as
of this 31st day of December 2020, by and between the CITY
OF SANTEE, a California charter city ("City"), and HOME START, INC., a
non-profit organization (DUNS #158661678) ("Subrecipient"). City and
Subrecipient are sometimes individually referred to herein as "Party" and
collectively as "Parties."
RECITALS
WHEREAS, the City, as a recipient under Title I of the Housing and
Community Development Act of 1974, as amended (42 U.S.C. Section 5301
et seq.) (the "Act"), receives an entitlement Community Development Block
Grant annually ("CDBG funds") from the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development ("HUD"); and
WHEREAS, on March 27, 2020, the President signed H.R. 748,
known as the Coronavirus, Relief and Economic Security ("CARES") Act.
The CARES Act provides an additional $5 billion of Community
Development Block Grant - Coronavirus funds ("CDBG-CV funds") to
rapidly prepare, prevent, and respond to the coronavirus pandemic; and
WHEREAS, on April 2, 2020, HUD notified the City that it had
allocated $162,104 in CDBG-CV funds to the City. According to HUD, the
City "may use the funds for a range of eligible activities that prevent and
respond to the spread of infectious diseases such as the coronavirus;" and
WHEREAS, on June 10, 2020, the Santee City Council authorized an
amendment to the Program Year 2019 Plan to provide $162,104 in CDBGCV
funds to support services to prevent, prepare for, and respond to the
impacts of the coronavirus. In addition to the City's CDBG-CV allocation,
Program Year 2019 CDBG funds in the amount of $85,389 were made
available for use for the same services as CDBG-CV services, as well as
administration costs; and
60838.00000\33521944. I
WHEREAS, on August 4, 2020, the City and HUD entered into a
Grant Agreement pursuant to the authority of title 1 of the Housing and
Community Development Act of 1974, as amended (42 USC 5301 et seq.),
which also included certain CDBG-CV Requirements; and
WHEREAS, the Subrecipient has submitted a Program Description to
the City for a grant of funds for program year 2020/2021 which is dated as
November 16, 2020, and is incorporated herein by reference as if fully set
forth herein (the "Subrecipient Application"); and
WHEREAS, the City has approved the Subrecipient Application and
now desires to make a grant of CDBG-CV funds to the Subrecipient,
pursuant to the terms of this Agreement and all applicable provisions of the
Act, to carry out the Project the Subrecipient described in the Subrecipient
Application, which is briefly summarized below under the heading "Grant
Amount and Statement of Work"; and
WHEREAS, according to federal regulations 24 CFR 570.503, before
disbursing any CDBG or CDBG-CV funds to a Subrecipient, a written
agreement shall be signed by the Recipient and Subrecipient; and
WHEREAS, the Subrecipient's participation in the programs funded
by the CARES Act complies with all applicable federal laws, regulations and
executive orders; and
WHEREAS, prior to the City's release of CDBG-CV funds to the
Subrecipient, the City desires certain assurances as more fully set forth
herein; and
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of these recitals, which are
hereby fully incorporated into this Agreement, and the mutual covenants
contained herein, the City and the Subrecipient agree as follows:
1. GRANT AMOUNT AND STATEMENT OF WORK
A Scope of Services
Program Delivery
The City has allocated CDBG-CV funds to the Subrecipient in the
maximum aggregate amount of One Hundred and Sixty-Eight
Thousand, Nine-Hundred Seventy-Six Dollars ($168,976) ("Grant
Funds") to be used for eligible program costs associated with
pmviding rental assistance payments on behalf of eligible Santee
60838.00000133521944. l
2020-2021 CD BG-CV Subrecipient Contract
Home Start, Inc.
Page 2
households impacted by the coronavirus pandemic. as further
outlined in the Subrecipient Application ( collectively referred to herein
as, the "Services"), and as detailed in Attachment 1 (the "Scope of
Work"). In addition to costs associated with providing services, eligible
program costs include administrative costs such as salaries, wages
and related costs of the Subrecipient's staff for program coordination
and implementation and consistent with guidance provided by the
U.S. Department of Treasury on the CARES Act to state, local, and
tribal governments.
General Administration
The administrative offices of the Subrecipient are located at 5005
Texas Street, Suite 203, San Diego, CA 92108 General administration
services to be performed by the Subrecipient in support of the
services noted above and in the Subrecipient Application include, but
are not limited to, the preparation of reports and documents required
by HUD in connection with CDBG-CV funds.
Eligible administrative costs include salaries, wages and related costs
of the Subrecipient's staff for program coordination and
implementation.
Budget
The Subrecipient may request to draw down on the Grant Funds as
outlined in Attachment 1, unless receipts and appropriate
documentation can be provided to, and approved by, the City
indicating the need to draw down on funds earlier.
National Objectives
The Subrecipient certifies that the activities carried out with Grant
Funds provided by the City to the Subrecipient under this Agreement
will only be used to cover costs to prevent, prepare for, and respond
to the coronavirus as set forth in Public Law 116􀁬136.The Subrecipient
acknowledges that the funds being provided by the City for the Grant
Program are distributed pursuant to CARES Act, Public Law-116-136.
The Subrecipient agrees to comply with the requirements of the CARES
Act, Public Law 116-136, and any implementing regulations and
programmatic requirements.
6083 8.00000\33521944.J
2020-2021 CDBG-CV Subrecipient Contract
Home Start, Inc.
Page3
B. Performance Monitoring
The City will monitor the performance of the Subrecipient against
goals and performance standards required herein or by HUD in
connection with CDBG-CV funds. Substandard performance, as
determined by the City in its sole discretion, will constitute noncompliance
with this Agreement. If action to correct such substandard
performance is not taken by the Subrecipient within a reasonable
period of time, but no later than 90 days, after being notified by the
City, the City may suspend any pending disbursements of Grant
Funds or may, in its sole discretion, terminate this Agreement in the
manner provided herein.
2. PERIOD OF PERFORMANCE / TERM OF AGREEMENT
The Subrecipient shall commence the Services on the 1 st day of
December 2020, and shall complete all Services to be reimbursed
under this Agreement on or before July 30, 2021 {the "Period of
Performance"). This Agreement shall expire on the date the City
remits the last reimbursement payment to the Subrecipient pursuant
to this Agreement or on July 30, 2021, whichever is later (the
"Expiration Date"); provided that the Subrecipient's obligation t9
comply with the provisions of the Act and the CARES Act shall remain
in effect as long as the Subrecipient shall retain any Program Income
(as defined in Paragraph 4, below) or as long as any other obligation
of the Subrecipient under the Act or the CARES Act remains
unfulfilled, at the discretion of HUD or the City.
Every effort shall be made by the Subrecipient to expend the allocated
funds in their entirety before the conclusion of the Period of
Performance. If the Subrecipient does not expend all funds by the
end of the Period of Performance, the City will have no further
obligation to disburse Grant Funds to the Subrecipient under this
Agreement and may reallocate CDBG-CV funds not yet drawn to
another eligible project and/or recipient.
3. DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS
The City shall reimburse the Subrecipient with CDBG-CV funds for
administrative and program costs related to the provision of the
Services for eligible residents/citizens of the City during the Period of
60838.00000\33521944. l
2020-2021 CDBG-CV Subrecipient Contract
Home Start, Inc.
Page4
Performance. The City has no obligation to reimburse the
Subrecipient for Services provided outside the Period of Performance.
In addition, the aggregate amount of the reimbursements paid to
the Subrecipient shall not exceed the allocated Grant Funds.
The Subrecipient shall submit a "Reimbursement Request" to the
City to request reimbursement for costs related to the provision of the
Services. Each Reimbursement Request shall include docume􀅖tation
to verify that the expenditure of funds is consistent with the
Subrecipient Application, as approved by the City. Prior to approving
a Reimbursement Request, the City will verify that the Subrecipient
has met all applicable CDBG-CV regulations. The City shall not
provide any payments or reimbursements in advance of actual
expenditures by the Subrecipient nor for any expenditures unrelated
to the Services. Funding is contingent upon the City receiving its
allocation of CDBG-CV funds from HUD.
Payroll records, receipts and paid invoices including an itemized
statement of all costs are samples of appropriate methods of
reimbursement documentation.
The Subrecipient may request reimbursements on a quarterly
basis after this Agreement is approved by the City Council and until
the Expiration Date, or any amended Expiration Date, of this
Agreement.
4. PROGRAM INCOME
The Subrecipient shall report to the City any interest or other income
earned by the Subrecipient as a direct result of the use of CDBG-CV
funds in connection with any activities described in 24 CFR Part
570.500(a)(1) incorporated herein by reference and attached hereto
as Attachment 2 ("Program Income"). All Program Income may be
retained by the Subrecipient to be used in connection with the
Services. Program Income retained by the Subrecipient must be
expended before additional funds are requested from the City. When
the Subrecipient retains Program Income, transfers of CDBG-CV
funds from the City to the Subrecipient shall be adjusted according to
24 CFR 570.504(b)(2)(i) and (ii) incorporated herein by reference and
included as Attachment 2. Any Program Income not used in
connection with the Services, whether on hand when this Agreement
expires or received by the Subrecipient after the Expiration Date, shall
60838.00000\33521944. I
2020-2021 CDBG-CV Subrecipient Contract
Home Start, Inc.
Page 5
I
I
'
be remitted by the Subrecipient to the City in accordance with the
provisions of 24 CFR 570.503(b )(3). The requirements for disposition
of Program Income are set forth at 24 CFR Part 570.504(c) which is
incorporated herein by reference and included in Attachment 2.
5. NOTICES
Communication and details concerning this Agreement shall be
directed to the following Agreement representatives:
CITY:
City of Santee
CDBG Program Administrator
1 0601 Magnolia Avenue
Santee, CA 92071
(61 9) 258-41 00 ext. 221
Email: bcrane@cityofsanteeca.gov
SUBRECIPIENT:
Home Start, Inc.
Laura Tancredi-Baese, Chief Excutive Officer
5005 Texas Street, Suite 203
San Diego, CA 921 08
(61 9) 933-9850
Email: lpollick@home-start.org
2020-2021 CDBG-CV Subrecipient Contract
Home Start, Inc.
Page 6
60838.00000\33521944. I
6. LABOR, MATERIALS AND SUPPLIES
The Subreci pient shall furnish all labor, materials and supplies and
bear all expenses necessary to provide the Services as outlined in
this Agreement. Under this Agreement, the City's only financial
obligation to the Subrecipient is to disburse Grant Funds as allocated
by the City to the Subrecipient under this Agreement.
7. RECORDS AND REPORTS
The Subrecipient shall, at minimum, maintain the following records
and reports to assist the City in complying with its record keeping
requirements.
a) Documentation of the income level , ethnicity, age of persons
and/or households participating in or benefiting from the
Subrecipient's program;
b) Documentation. of the number of persons and/or households
participating in or benefiting from the Subrecipient's program;
c) Documentation of all CDBG-CV funds received from the City;
d) Documentation of expenses as identified in the quarterly report
and reimbursement requests;
e) Documentation of how and when a determination was made as
to the eligibility status of persons assisted, including evidence
that the persons assisted are domiciled within the approved
area of service, if any;
f) Documentation of compliance with any applicable Equal
Employment Opportunity guidel ines and evidence of any
actions undertaken by the Subrecipient to ensure equal
employment opportunities to all persons ; and
g) Any such other related records as the City shall require or as
are necessary pursuant to 24 CFR 570.506.
The Subreci pient shall submit "Quarterly Reports" during the term
of this Agreement, within thirty (30) calendar days of the end of each
quarter. The first Quarterly Report is due on or before January 31 ,
2021 , and the final Quarterly Report is due no later than July 31 , 2021 .
6083 B .0000013 3 521944. I
2020-202 1 CDBG-CV S ubrecipient Contract
Home Start, Inc.
Page ?
Each Quarterly Report m ust include sufficient i nformation to assist the
City in monitoring the Subrecipient's performance under the terms of
this Agreement. The Subrecipient must submit its Quarterly Report
and demonstrate satisfactory performance, at the sole discretion of
the City, prior to reimbursement for expenditures under a
Reimbursement Request.
The Subrecipient shall maintain separate accounting records for the
CDBG-CV funds provided by the City. The City, HUD, the Comptroller
General of the United States, or any of their duly authorized
representatives shall have access to all books, documents, papers
and records maintained by the Subrecipient in connection with the
Services for the purpose of audit, examination, excerpts and
transcriptions.
Unless otherwise notified by the City, the Subrecipient shall retain all
financial records, supporting documents and statistical reports related
to the project identified under this Agreement for four (4) years from
the date of execution of the Agreement. All records subject to an audit
finding must be retained for five (5) years from the date the finding is
made or until the finding has been cleared by appropriate officials and
the Subrecipient has been given official written notice.
8. SINGLE AUDIT REQUIREMENT
If the Subrecipient shall receive more than Seven Hundred Fifty
Thousand Dollars ($750,000.00) in total federal funds in one fiscal
year from the City and/or any other city or agency, the Subrecipient is
required to submit a Single Audit Report. As required by the Federal
Single Audit Act, the Subrecipient shall be required to submit to the
City, a comprehensive financial audit prepared by an independent,
neutral third-party auditor. The audit shall cover financial operations
of the Subrecipient for the Period of Performance, and shall be
submitted to the City not later than one year after Expiration Date.
9. PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS
The Subrecipient shall adhere to the terms of the City's application for
CDBG-CV funds, the Subrecipient Application and this Agreement
and shall comply with assurances and agreements made by the City
to HUD in connection with CDBG-CV funds.
60838.00000\3352 l 944. l
2020-2021 CDBG-CV S u brecipient Contract
Home Start, Inc.
Page 8
The Subrecipient shall comply with applicable Uniform Administrative
Requirements as described in 24 CFR Part 570.502, incorporated
herein by reference and attached to this Agreement as Attachment
3.
The Subrecipient shall carry out all activities in compliance with all
Federal laws and regulations as set forth in Subpart K of the Code of
Federal Regulations, commencing with 24 CFR Part 570.600, which
is incorporated herein by reference as a condition of this Agreement
and is included as Attachment 4, such as labor standards (Davis
Bacon Act), fair housing requirements of the CDBG-CV Program
Regulations, except that:
a) The Subrecipient will not assume the City's environmental
responsibilities as described in Section 570.604; and
b) The Subrecipient will not assume the City's responsibility for
initiating the review process required under the provisions of 24
CFR Part 52.
The Subrecipient shall comply with all Federal regulations related to
the use of CDBG-CV funds by religious organizations, if applicable to
this Agreement and the approved project outlined herein.
10. SECTION 3 COVERED ASSISTANCE
Where the Subrecipient receives CDBG-CV funds for work arising in
connection with housing rehabilitation, housing construction, or other
public improvements, the requirements of Section 3 of the Housing
and Urban Development Act of 1 968, as amended, 1 2 U.S.C. Section
1 701 u ("Section 3") shall apply as follows:
A The purpose of Section 3 is to ensure that employment and
other economic opportunities generated by HUD assistance or
HUD-assisted projects covered by Section 3, shall, to the
greatest extent feasible, be directed to low- and very lowincome
persons, particularly persons who are recipients of HUD
assistance for housing.
B . The parties to this contract agree to comply with H UD's
regulations in 24 CFR Part 1 35, which implement Section 3. As
evidenced by their execution of this contract, the parties to this
contract certify that they are under no contractual or other
6083 8.00000\3352 1 944.1
2020-2021 CDBG-CV Subrecipient Contract
Home Start, Inc.
Page 9
impediment that would prevent them from complying with the
Part 1 35 regulations.
C. The contractor agrees to send to each labor organization or
representative of workers with which the contractor has a
collective bargaining agreement or other understanding, if any,
a notice advising the labor organization or workers'
representative of the contractor's commitments under this
Section 3 clause, and will post copies of the notice in
conspicuous places at the work site where both employees and
applicants for training and employment positions can see the
notice. The notice shall describe the Section 3 preference, shall
set forth minimum number of job titles subject to hire, availability
of apprenticeship and training positions, the qualifications for
each; and the name and location of the person(s) taking
applications for each of the positions; and the anticipated date
the work shall begin.
D. The contractor agrees to include this Section 3 clause in every
subcontract subject to compliance with regulations in 24 CFR
Part 1 35, and agrees to take appropriate action, as provided in
an applicable provision of the subcontract or in this Section 3
clause, upon a finding that the subcontractor is in violation of
the regulations in 24 CFR Part 1 35. The contractor will not
su bcontract with any subcontractor where the contractor has
notice or knowledge that the subcontractor has been found in
violation of the regulations in 24 CFR Part 135.
E. The contractor will certify that any vacant employment
positions, including training positions, that are filled (1 ) after the
contractor is selected but before the contract is executed, and
(2) with persons other than those to whom the regulations of 24
CFR Part 1 35 require employment opportu nities to be directed,
were not filled to circumvent the contractor's obligations under
24 CFR Part 1 35.
F. Noncompliance with HUD's regulations in 24 CFR Part 1 35 may
result in sanctions, termination of this contract for default, and
debarment or suspension from future HUD assisted contracts.
60838.00000\33521944. J
2020-2021 CDBG-CV S ubrecipient Contract
Home Start, Inc.
Page 1 0
1 1 . RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION
The Subrecipient agrees that funds provided under this contract will
not be utilized for religious activities or to promote religious interests.
Religious entities may use CDBG-CV funds for secular activities only
in accordance with the Federal regulations specified in 24 CFR
570.2000) as follows:
Constitutional prohibition. The following restrictions and limitations
therefore apply to the use of CDBG-CV funds.
( 1 ) CD BG-CV funds may not be used for the acquisition of property
or the construction or rehabilitation (including historic
preservation and removal of architectural barriers) of structures
to be used for religious purposes or which will otherwise
promote religious interest. This limitation includes the
acquisition of property for ownership by primarily religious
entities and the construction or rehabilitation (including historic
preservation and removal of architectural barriers) of structures
owned by such entities (except as permitted under paragraph
U) of 24 CFR 570.200 with respect to rehabilitation and under
paragraph U) thereof with respect to repairs undertaken in
connection with public services) regardless of the use to be
made of the property or structure. Property owned by primarily
religious entities may be acquired with CDBG funds at no more
than fair market value for the non-religious use.
(i) Organizations that are religious or faith-based are
eligible, on the same basis as any other organization, to
participate in the CDBG program. Neither the Federal
government nor a State or local government receiving funds
60838.00000\3352 1 944.l
2020-2021 CDBG-CV Subrecipient Contract
Home Start, Inc.
Page 1 1
under CDBG programs shall discriminate against an
organization on the basis of the organization's religious
character or affiliation.
(ii) Organizations that are directly funded under the CDBG
program may not engage in inherently religious activities, such
as worship, religious instruction, or proselytization, as part of
the programs or services funded under this part. If an
organization conducts such activities, the activities must be
offered separately, in time or location, from the programs or
services funded under this part, and participation must be
voluntary for the beneficiaries of the HUD-funded programs or
services.
(iii) A religious organization that participates in the CDBG
program will retain its independence from Federal, State, and
local governments, and may continue to carry out its mission,
including the definition, practice, and expression of its religious
beliefs, provided that it does not use direct CDBG funds to
support any inherently religious activities, such as worship,
religious instruction, or proselytization. Among other things,
faith-based organizations may use space in their facilities to
provide CDBG-funded services, without removing religious art,
icons, scriptures, or other religious symbols. In addition, a
CDBG-funded religious organization retains its authority over
its internal governance, and it may retain religious terms in its
organization's name, select its board members on a religious
basis, and include religious references in its organization's
mission statements and other governing documents.
(iv) An organization that participates in the CDBG program
shall not, in providing program assistance, discriminate against
a program beneficiary or prospective program beneficiary on
the basis of religion or religious belief.
(v) CDBG funds may not be used for the acquisition,
construction, or rehabilitation of structures to the extent that
those structures are used for inherently religious activities.
CDBG funds may be used for the acquisition, construction, or
rehabilitation of structures only to the extent that those
structures are used for conducting eligible activities under this
part. Where a structure is used for both eligible and inherently
6083 8.00000\3352 1 944. I
2020-202 1 CDBG-CV Subrecipient Contract
Home Start, Inc.
Page 1 2
religious activities, CDBG funds may not exceed the cost of
those portions of the acquisition, construction, or rehabilitation
that are attributable to el igible activities in accordance with the
cost of accounting requirements applicable to CDBG funds in
this part. Sanctuaries, chapels, or other rooms that a CDBG
funded religious congregation uses as its principal place of
worship, however, are ineligible for CDBG-funded
improvements. Disposition of real property after the term of the
grant, or any change in use of the property during the term of
the grant, is subject to government-wide regulations governing
real property disposition (see 2 CFR 200).
(vi) If a State or local government voluntarily contributes its
own funds to supplement federally funded activities, the State
or local government has the option to segregate the Federal
funds or commingle them. However, if the funds are
commingled , this section applies to all of the commingled funds.
12. CHANGES IN USE OF FUNDS
Changes in the use of CDBG funds must be approved by the City
Council. If the Subrecipient desires a change in the use of the CDBG
funds following approval of this Agreement, a written -request must be
submitted to the City for review by the Council. No change in use of
the CDBG funds will be permitted by the City without prior formal
approval by the City, subject to the provisions of the City's adopted
Citizen Participation Plan.
13. NONDISCRIMINATION CLAUSE
The Subrecipient shall comply with all State and Federal laws
regarding nondiscrimination in the provision of services and the equal
opportunity employment of personnel.
14. SUSPENSION AND TERMINATION OF AGREEMENT
In accordance with 2 CFR 200.338 and 200.339, this Agreement may
be suspended or terminated if the Subrecipient materially fails to
comply with any term(s) of the award and/or the award is
60838,00000\335 2 1 944.1
2020-202 1 CDBG-CV Subrecipient Contract
Home Start, Inc.
Page 1 3
terminated for convenience. Title 2, Sections 200.338 and 200.339 of
the Code of Federal Regulations are incorporated herein by reference
as provisions of this Agreement and are included as Attachment 5.
1 5. REVERSION OF ASSETS
Prior to the approval by the City of the final Reimbursement Request,
the Subrecipient shall transfer to the City any CDBG-CV funds on
hand as of the last day of the Period of Performance and any accounts
receivable attributable to the use of CDBG-CV funds. The
Subrecipient shall be required to use any real property under the
Subrecipient's control that was acquired or improved in whole or in
part with CD BG-CV funds in excess of Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars
($25,000 .00) as follows:
a) Used to meet one of the National Objectives in 24 CFR 570.208
until five (5) years after expiration of this Agreement; or,
b) Disposed of in a manner that results in the City being
reimbursed in the amount of the current fair market value of the
property less any portion of the value attributable to
expenditures of non-CDBG-CV funds for acquisition or
improvement to the property. Reimbursement is not required
after the period of time specified in paragraph (a) of this section.
16. HOLD HARMLESS AND INDEMNITY AGREEMENT
The City, its elected and appointed officials, officers, employees,
volunteers and agents shall not be liable for any claims, liabilities,
penalties, fines, or any damage to goods, properties, or effects of any
person whatsoever, nor for personal injuries or death caused by, or
claimed to have been caused by, or resulting from, any intentional or
negligent acts, errors or omissions, or other wrongful conduct of the
Subrecipient or the Subrecipient's agents, employees, or
representatives related in any way to the Sub recipient's performance
of Services pursuant to this Agreement or the completion of the
project outlined in the Agreement.
The Subrecipient agrees to defend, indemnify, and hold free and
harmless the City and its elected and appointed officials, officers,
employees, volunteers and agents against any claims, liabilities,
penalties, fines, or any damage to goods, properties, or effects of any
person whatsoever, for personal injuries or death caused by, or
60838.00000\3352 1 944 . 1
2020-2021 CDBG-CV Subrecipient Contract
Home Start, Inc.
Page 1 4
claimed to have been caused by, or resulting from, any intentional or
negligent acts, errors or omissions of the Subrecipient or the
Subrecipient's agents, employees, or representatives and any cost
and/or expense that is incurred by the City on account of any of the
foregoing liabilities, including liabilities or claims by reason of alleged
defects in any plans and specifications for the project or facility.
17. ASSIGNMENT OF AGREEMENT
The Subrecipient shall not assign this Agreement or any monies due
hereunder without the prior written consent of the City.
18. SUCCESSORS OR ASSIGNS
Subject to the provisions of the Subrecipient Agreement Paragraph
1 6, "Hold Harmless and Indemnity Agreement," all terms, conditions,
and provisions hereof shall inure to and shall bind each of the parties
hereto, and each of their respective heirs, executors, administrators,
successors, and assigns.
19. INSURANCE
A. Commercial General Liability
(i) The Subrecipient shall take out and maintain, during the
performance of all work under this Agreement, in
amounts not less than specified herein, Commercial
General Liability Insurance, in a form and with insurance
companies acceptable to the City.
(ii) Coverage for Commercial General Liability insurance
shall be at least as broad as the following :
(a) Insurance Services Office Commercial General
Liability coverage (Occurrence Form CG 0001 )
(iii) Commercial General Liability Insurance must include
coverage for the following:
60838.00D00\33521944.1
(a) Bodily Injury (including death) and Property
Damage
(b) Personal Injury/Advertising Injury
(c) Premises/Operations Liability
2020-2021 CDBG-CV Subrecipient Contract
Home Start, Inc.
Page 1 5
(d) Products/Completed Operations Liability
(e) Aggregate Limits that Apply per Project
(f) Explosion, Collapse and Underground ( UCX)
exclusion deleted
(g) Contractual Liability with respect to this Contract
(h) Broad Form Property Damage
(i) Independent Subrecipient's Coverage
U) Sexual Misconduct Coverage, with no applicable
sublimit
(iv) All such policies shall name the City of Santee, its City
Council and each member thereof, its officers,
employees, and agents as Additional Insureds under the
policy.
(v) The general liability program may utilize either
deductibles or provide coverage excess of a self-insured
retention, subject to written approval by the City. All
deductibles and self-insured retentions must be declared
to the City prior to commencing work under this
Agreement.
B. Automobile Liability
(i) At all times during the performance of the work under this
Agreement the Subrecipient shall maintain Automobile
Liability Insurance for bodily injury (including death) and
property damage including coverage for owned, nonowned
and hired vehicles, in a form and with insurance
companies acceptable to the City.
(ii) Coverage for automobile liability insurance shall be at
least as broad as Insurance Services Office Form
60838.00000\33521944. l
2020-202 1 CDBG-CV Subrecipient Contract
Home Start, Inc.
Page 1 6
Number CA 0001 (ed. 6/92) covering automobile liability,
Code 1 (any auto).
(iii) The automobile liability program may utilize deductibles,
but not a self-insured retention, subject to written
approval by the City.
C. Workers' Compensation/Employer's Liability
(i) At all times during the performance of the work under this
Agreement the Subrecipient shall maintain workers'
compensation in compliance with applicable statutory
requirements and Employer's Liability Coverage in
amounts indicated herein. Such insurance shall include
an insurer's Waiver of Subrogation in favor of the City and
will be in a form and with insurance companies
acceptable to the Grantee.
(ii) If insurance is maintained, the workers' compensation
and employer's liability program may utilize either
deductibles or provide coverage excess of a self-insured
retention, subject to written approval by the City.
(iii) Before beginning work, the Subrecipient shall furnish to
the City satisfactory proof that he/she has taken out for
the period covered by the work under this Agreement, full
compensation insurance for all persons employed
directly by him/her to carry out the work contemplated
under this Agreement, all in accordance with the
"Workers' Compensation and Insurance Act," Division IV
of the Labor Code of the State of California and any acts
amendatory thereof. Subrecipient shall require all
contractors to obtain and maintain, for the period covered
by the work under this Agreement, worker's
60838.00000\33521 944. I
2020-2021 CDBG-CV Subrecipient Contract
Home Start, I nc.
Page 1 7
compensation of the same type and limits as specified in
this Section.
D. M i n imum Policy Limits Required .
(i) The following insurance limits are required for the
Contract:
(ii)
Commercial
Liability
Combined Single Limit
General $2,000,000 per
occurrence/$4,000,000
aggregate for bodily injury
(including death), personal injury
and property damage
Automobile Liability $1 ,000,000 per occurrence for
bodily injury (including death)
and property damage
Em ployer's Liability $1 ,000,000 per occurrence
E. Evidence Req u i red.
(i) Prior to execution of the Agreement, the Subrecipient
shall file with the City evidence of insurance from an
insurer or insurers certifying to the coverage of all
insurance required herein. Such evidence shall include
original copies of the ISO CG 201 0 ( or insurer's
equivalent) signed by the insurer's representative,
Certificate of Insurance (most recent version of Acord 25
Form or equivalent), and Additional Insured
Endorsement verifying compliance with the requirements
above. All evidence of insurance shall be signed by a
properly authorized officer, agent or qualified
representative of the insurer and shall certify the names
of the insured, any additional primary insureds, where
appropriate, the type and amount of the insurance, the
60838.00000\33521944. I
2020-202 1 CDBG-CV Subrecipient Contract
Home Start, Inc.
Page 1 8
location and operations to which the insurance applies,
and the expiration date of such insurance.
F. Policy Provisions Required.
(i) The City, its City Council and each member thereof, its
officers, employees, and agents shall be named as an
additional insured on the Commercial General Liability
policy using form 201 0 1 1 85 or equivalent. Any
contractor or similar entity performing work on the Project
must add the City as an additional insured using CG form
20 38, or broader coverage. Blanket endorsements may
be accepted at City's discretion. All policies shall contain
or shall be endorsed to contain a provision that advanced
written notice of any cancellation, including cancellation
for non-payment of premium, shall be provided to the
City. Statements that the carrier "will endeavor'' and "that
failure to mail such notice shall impose no obligation and
liability upon the company, its agents or representatives,"
will not be acceptable on endorsements. At the City's
sole discretion, the requirement to endorse policies to
provide advanced written notice of cancellation to the
City may be waived upon the Subrecipient's agreement
that it shall provide the City with copies of any notices of
cancellation immediately upon receipt.
(ii) General Liability and Automobile Liability insurance
policies shall contain a provision stating that the
Subrecipient's policies are primary insurance and that the
insurance of the City or any named additional insureds
shall not be called upon to contribute to any loss.
G. Qualifying Insurers.
(i) All policies required shall be issued by acceptable
insurance companies, as determined by the City, which
satisfy the following minimum requirements:
60838.00000\33521944.1
Insurance carriers shall be qualified to do business in
California and maintain an agent for process within the
State. Such insurance carrier shall have not less than an
'A' policyholder's rating and a financial rating of not less
than "Class VII" according to the latest Best Key Rating
2020-2021 CDBG-CV Subrecipient Contract
Home Start, Inc.
Page 1 9
Guide. Due to market fluctuations in the Workers
Com pensation sector, the City reserves the right and at
its sole discretion to review and accept the Subrecipient's
proposed Workers com pensation insurance.
H. Additional Insurance Provisions
(i) The foregoing requirements as to the types and limits of
insurance coverage to be maintained by Subrecipient,
and any approval of said insurance by the City, is not
intended to and shall not in any manner limit or q ualify
the liabilities and obligations otherwise assumed by the
Subrecipient pursuant to this Agreement, including but
not limited to, the provisions concerning indemnification.
(ii) If at any time during the life of the Ag reement, the
Subrecipient fails to maintain in full force any insurance
required by the Agreement documents the City may
terminate the Agreement or may elect to withhold
compensation in an amount sufficient to purchase
insurance to replace any expired or insufficient coverage.
(iii) The Subrecipient shall include all contractors as insureds
under its policies or shall furnish separate certificates and
endorsements for each contractor. All coverage for
contractors shall be subject to all of the requirements
stated herein.
(iv) rhe City may require the Subrecipient to provide
complete copies of all insurance policies in effect for the
duration of the P roject.
(v) Neither the City, nor its City Council, nor any member of
thereof, nor any of the directors, officers, employees,
agents or volunteers shall be personally responsible for
any liability arising under or by virtue of the Contract.
20. AUTHORITY TO EXECUTE THIS AGREEMENT
The person or persons executing this Agreement on behalf of the
Subrecipient warrants and represents that he/she has the authority to
execute this Agreement on behalf of the Subrecipient and has the
6O83 8.00000\3352 1 944. l
2020-202 1 CDBG-CV Subrecipient Contract
Hom e Start, Inc.
Page 20
authority to bind the Subreci pient to the performance of its obligations
hereunder.
IN WITNESS WH E REOF the parties hereto have ca used this Agreement to
be executed as of the day and year first written above .
CITY OF SANTEE
SUB RECIPI ENT
Home Start, Inc.
􀀂j,,p􀀃
Laura Tancredi-Baese, Chief E xecutive Officer
APPROVED AS TO FORM :
Shawn Hagerty, City Attorney
60838.000001 3 3 52 1944. 1
2020-202 1 CDBG-CV Subrecipient Contract
Home Start, Inc.
Page 2 1
ATTAC HM ENTS
List of Attachments
Attachment 1 - Scope of Work
Attachment 2 - Program Income - 24 CFR Part 570.500(a)(1 )
- U nused Program I ncome - 24 CFR Part 570.503(b)(3)
- Transfers of Program Income - 24 CFR Part 570 .504(b)(2)
- Disposition of Program Income - 24 CFR Part 570.504(c)
Attach ment 3 - U niform Administrative Requirements
- 24 CFR Part 570.502
Attachment 4 - Subpart K of the CDBG Regulations - commencing with
- 24 CFR Part 570.600
Attachment 5 - Suspension or Termination of Agreement
- 2 CFR Parts 200.338 and 200.339
60838.00000\3352 1 944. l
ATTACHM ENT 1
SCOPE OF WORK
CONTRACT TERM : October 1 , 2020 through June 30, 2021
ADDRESS OF AGENCY: Home Start, I nc.
CONTACT PERSON:
PHONE:
FAX:
5005 Texas Street, Suite 203
San Diego, CA 92108
Laura Tancredi-Baese
(6 19) 933-9850
(619) 933-9850
PROJ ECT GOALS, OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES:
Subrecipient agrees to provide the following services to City:
1 . Provide rental assistance to Santee households directly impacted b y a loss
of income due to the coronavirus pandemic. Up to six months of assistance
will be provided directly to landlords to help low-income households avoid
eviction and becoming homeless. The Rental Assistance program is further
described in Exhibit A (Program Description) and Exhibit 8 (Policies and
Procedures).
2. Report quarterly performance and demographic data via submittal of a
Quarterly Report, to the CDBG Program Administrator, said Quarterly
Report due by the 10th day of the following month. The CDBG Program
Administrator may approve an alternative schedule for the submission of
performance and demographic data as warranted by the nature of the
activity performed.
3. Provide a Final Evaluation Report of program's success meeting
established goals.
4. Provide n otification to Grantee of any audits or investigations including
results, findings, and/or liens.
60838.00000\3 3 5 2 1 944 . I
2020-202 1 CDBG-CV Subrecipient Contract
Home Start, Inc.
Page 23
EXHIBIT A
City of Santee COVID-1 9 Rental Assistance Program:
Description of Program:
Home Start, Inc. will operate a program to assist Santee residents (individuals and families) directly
impacted by a loss of income due to the COVID-1 9 public health emergency. Assistance will be provided in
the form of rental payments directly to landlords to help residents avoid eviction and prevent residents from
becoming homeless.
Home Start, Inc. will support households whose income falls below 80 percent of the local AMI and are at
risk of losing their housing by providing up to 6 months of rental assistance and case management. Home
Start, Inc. will leverage our expertise and existing homelessness prevention and rapid re-housing programs to
ensure we are able to begin operations immediately and have well-trained and knowledgeable staff that can
administer the program. Households will be limited to a maximum of $ 1 0,000 of rental assistance. When
necessary, Home Start, Inc. will also provide mediation with landlords to ensure client housing stability. All
households will be educated on the short-term nature of the funding and work with case management to
develop a long-term housing stability plan to ensure they are able to maintain housing.
Funds will be used to make rental payments directly to landlords or property managers. Clients will be
required to provide income certification, recent landlord notices, and proof of present address ( e.g., rent
receipt, lease or deed, property tax bill). Case management will be provided to assist clients with increasing
income and other resources to provide stabilization and financial security. Follow up services will be
provided to all clients including refen-als to internal and external resources.
Home Start, Inc. will offer the following services :
• Maintain staff to serve the needs of the program.
• Provide assistance in English, Spanish, and Arabic.
• Maintain a webpage with the application link and all program information including instructional
videos of the application process in English, Spanish, and Arabic.
• Issue rental payments directly to landlords.
• Maintain complete records of applications and documents submitted; provide all records to the City
in electronic format.
• Provide the City with weekly updates regarding the number of applications received, applications
processed, and grant amounts awarded.
• If applicants are receiving assistance for more than 1 00 days and property requires a Lead Based
Paint inspection, Home Statt will facilitate to comply with City's requirements.
1
Application Process:
1 . The Application Period shall be at least one week but may be extended if necessary, based on mutual
consent between Home Start, Inc. and the City. Extension of the Application Period shall be
marketed to Santee residents using the same methods prescribed in the section above.
2. Applications will be accepted on a first-come first-served basis by online submission and in-person at
Home Start, Inc. ' s office in El Cajon. All applications will be date and time stamped to ensure
applications are processed on a first-come, first served basis. Home Start, Inc. will request that all
supporting documents are submitted with the application or within three days of application review
period.
3 . Home Start, Inc. will maintain a complete database o f applications received including the date and
time applications were submitted. This database will be made available to the City for review along
with the final database for documentation purposes.
4. Home Start, Inc. will work with residents to complete applications in the order received; including
providing help to residents that need assistance submitting supporting documentation.
5. If the applicant lives in a unit that was built before 1 978, Home Start will facilitate a lead-based paint
inspection. Dependent on results, application will be processed.
Documents included:
• Rental assistance application with demographic information included
• Paystub prior to COVID
• Income documentation that your income has been impacted by COVID: unemployment, furlough
letter, paystubs that indicate a decrease in house, bank statements, medical documents
• Past due ledger with itemized past due balance detailing months and amounts
• Copy of ID
• W-9 from landlord
• Copy of current lease
2
D O M O R E ► D U E E A S T
City of S a ntee
D e pa rt m e nt of D eve l o p m e nt S e rvi ces
'' Ro u n d 3 11 C D B G -CV E m e rge n cy
R e nta l As s i sta n ce
P rog ra m Po l i c i e s a n d P ro ced u re s
D e ce m be r 2020
C D BG-CV E M ERG E N CY RENTAL ASSISTANCE P ROGRAM POLICIES AND P ROCE D U R ES :
Which households are eligible (all must be true) :
• Total household income (all persons over 18 years old) within the past 30-days m ust be at
or below 80 percent of AMI ("Low I ncome").
• Renta l u nits must be located with in City of Santee city limits.
• M ust have a written lease with verifiable address and adult tenants named.
• Households experiencing loss of income d irectly related to COVID-19.
o M ust have documented job loss, lay off, reduced hours or wage red u ction .
o COV I D-19 positive, or cari ng for someone who is COVI D-19 o r,
o Busi ness closure (temporary o r permanent) due to COVI D-19.
Which households are NOT eligi ble:
• Homeowner households,
• Households receiving other government-based rental assistance (including tena nt-based
vouchers , Housing Choice Vouchers, Project Based Voucher projects),
• M ust not be facing cu rrent evictio n p roceedings for issues other than non-payment of rent
from April 1 to the present,
• H ou seholds resid i ng in Pu blic Housing.
Assistance provided:
• One ( 1) to Six (6) consecutive months of rental assistance.
• Assistance can cover past due bala nce fo r rent begi nning no earlier than April 1, 2020.
• U p to $1,900 per month to cover past d u e rents from April 1 forwa rd related to COV I D 19.
• Assistance will be capped at $10,000 per household .
• Payments will be made di rectly to landlord on behalf of household (with household
verification).
Application Process:
• Tena nts will submit application to PROV I D E R .
• Docu ments to be submitted:
o Application for Renta l Assistance,
Page 2
o Certifications of in come, relationship to COVI D-19, and certification that household
is not receiving any other govern ment-based h ousing assistance,
o Two most recent paystubs {household member names and add ress must match
add ress on lease),
o Severance or reduction of hours letter from emp loyer,
o Proof of appl ication for unemployment benefits, o r p roof of denial of
une mployment ben efits,
o Co py of cu rrent l ease agreement with land lord's contact i nformation {oral lease
agreements are not e ligible for assistance),
o Copy of past due or eviction notice {rent due m ust be itemized by month ) .
Other Progra m requirements:
• Lead based paint inspection may be req u i red if the u nit was built before 1978 and the
assistance provider is longer than 100 d ays.
• Assistance must be available city-wide.
• Providers must describe how they will take applications in m u ltiple ways: on-line, email
scans, hard copies, in-person appointments.
• P ROVI D ERS shou ld, if possi ble, provide p rogram materials i n m u ltiple la nguages: English,
Spa nish.
• P ROVI D E RS sha l l use an o n-line tracking spreadsheet to ensure app licants apply to both
o rgan izatio ns, causing a d u p lication of benefits.
Projected n u mber served :
• At least t h i rty {30) households, based o n $ 10,000 assistance cap per household, more if
less than $ 10,000 is awa rded .
Budget:
• CDBG-CV Funds allocated from Federal Ca res Act funding.
• $168,976 with 15% a l lowed for P ROVI D E R's Adm inistration Costs.
Timing of Program I m p lementation :
• City Cou ncil approval of project and funding on Nove mber 18, 2020.
• Agree ments wi l l be sent to selected provider(s) i n December 2020.
Page 3
• Programs could begin as soon as agreements a re fu lly executed (est. Janu ary 2021}.
• Providers will advance fu nds for paym ent to land lords and City will reimburse the
p roviders.
Timing of HUD funding:
• City staff subm itted an a m e n d me nt to the Program Year 2019 Annual Action Plan to H U D in
December 2020.
• City can start d ispersing funds i m m ediately after execution of Grant Agreement between
City of Santee a n d H U D . Agreement ap proval is a nticipated in late December 2020 to
J a n u a ry 2021.
Marketing of Program and Referrals:
• City will a n nounce the Progra m ope n i ng on the City COVID-19 website a n d social media
platforms such as Facebook.
• PROV I D E R may a lso a n no u nce their p rogram's avail a bility o n their website a n d social
media.
• PROVIDER must describe how they will d eterm ine which househol d s will receive assistance
(first-come first-served, lotte ry, referrals, etc.} a n d at what point they will stop taking
applications.
• City a nd PROV I D ER must jointly p repare a plan for a n no u nce ments of suspe nsion or
termi nation of the progra m d u e to oversubscriptio n .
Page 4
§ 570.500 Defi n itions., 24 C . F.R. § 5 70.500
--- ------------ ------- ------- ------- ------------- -- ---- ------ ----------------- ---- . - - - ----- -- - - --- -- -------- - - --- - -- --
Attach m e n t 2
Code of Federal Regulations
Title 24. Housing and Urban Development
Subtitle B. Regulations Relating to H ousing and Urban Development
Chapter V. Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and Development, Depmtment of
H ousing and Urban Development (Refs & Annos)
Subchapter C. Community Facilities
Part 570 . Community Development Block Grants (Refs & Annos)
Subpa1i: J. Grant Administration ( Refs & Annos)
24 C.F.R. § 570.500
§ 570 .500 Definitions.
Effective : January 6, 2016
C urrentness
For the purposes of th is subpatt, the following terms shall apply:
(a) Program income means gross income received by the recipient or a subrecipient directly generated from the use of CDBG
funds, except as provided in paragraph (a)( 4 ) of this section.
( I ) Program i ncome inc l udes, but is not limited to, the following:
( i ) Proceeds from the disposition by sale or long-term lease of real property purchased or improved with CDBG funds;
( i i ) Proceeds from the disposition of equipment p urchased with CDBG funds;
( i i i ) Gross income from the use or rental of real or personal property acquired by the recipient or by a subrecipient w ith
CDBG funds, less costs incidental to generation of the income;
( iv) Gross inco111e from the use or rental o f real property, owned by the recipient or by a subrecipient, that was constructed
or improved with CDBG funds, less costs incidental to generation of the income;
(v) Payments of principal and interest on loans made using CDBG funds, except as provided in paragraph (a){3 ) of this
section;
(vi) Proceeds from the sale of loans made with CDBG funds;
(vii) Proceeds from sale of obligations secured by loans made with CDBG funds;
§ 570.500 Definitions., 24 C.F. R. § 570.500
(viii) [Reserved]
(ix) Interest earned on program income pending its disposition; and
(x) Funds collected through special assessments made against properties owned and occupied by households not of low
and moderate income, where the assessments are used to recover all or part of the CDBG portion ofa public improvement.
( 2 ) Program income does not include income earned (except for interest described in § 5 70.5 1 3 ) on grant advances from
the U.S. Treasury. The fol lowing items of income earned on grant advances must be remitted to HUD for transm ittal to
the U.S. Treasury, and will not be reallocated under section I 06( c) or ( d ) of the Act:
( i ) Interest earned from the investment of the initial proceeds of a grant advance by the U.S. Treasury;
( i i ) Interest earned on loans or other forms of assistance provided with CDBG funds that are used for activities determined
by HUD either to be ineligible or to fail to meet a national objective in accordance with the requirements of subpa1t C o f
this part, or that fai l substantially t o meet any other requirement of this pa1t; and
( i i i ) Interest earned on the investment o f amounts reimbursed to the CDBG program account prior to the use of the
reimbursed funds for eligible purposes.
(3 ) The calculation of the amount of program income for the recipient's CDBG program as a whole (i.e., comprising
activities catTied out by a grantee and its subrecipients) shall exclude payments made by subrecipients of principal and/
or interest on CD BG-funded loans received from grantees if such payments are made using program income received by
the subrecipient. (By making such payments, the subrecipient shall be deemed to have transfetTed program income to the
grantee. ) The amount of program income derived from this calculation shall be used for repotting purposes, for purposes
of applying the requirement under § 5 70 .504( b)(2)(iii), and in detem1ining limitations on planning and administration and
public services activities to be paid for with CDBG funds.
(4) Program income does not include:
( i ) Any income received in a single program year by the recipient and all its subrecipients if the total amount of such
i ncome does not exceed $25,000; and
( i i ) Amounts generated by activities that are financed by a loan guaranteed under section 1 0 8 of the Act and meet one or
more o f the public benefit criteria specified at § 5 70 .209( b)(2)(v) or are carried out in conj unction with a grant under section
I 08(q) in an area determined by HUD to meet the eligibil ity requirements for designation as an Urban Empowerment Zone
pursuant to 24 CFR pait 5 97, subpart B. Such exclusion shall not apply if CDBG funds are used to repay the guaranteed
loan. When such a guaranteed loan is paitially repaid with CDBG funds, the amount generated shall be prorated to reflect
the percentage of CDBG funds used . Amounts generated by activities financed with loans guaranteed under section I 08
which are not defined as program income shall be treated as miscellaneous revenue and shall not be subject to any of the
requirements of this part, except that the use of such funds shall be limited to activities that are located in a revitalization
WESTLAW ,;-, 2 0 2 0 rhurw;,-,11 R ,c, u t ➔ r 3 l\lo c l a 1 1 1 1 l•J o rr ;) l n a l U S Gove rn m e n t \/\for k s 2
§ 570.500 Defi n itions. , 24 C . F.R. § 570.500
strategy area and i mplement a HUD approved area revitalization strategy pursuant to § 9 I . 2 I 5 ( e ) o f this title. However,
such treatment shall not affect the right of the Secretary lo require the section I 08 borrower to pledge such amounts
as security for the guaranteed loan. The determination whether such amounts shall constitute program income shall be
governed by the provisions of the contract required at § 570.70 5 ( b )( I ).
( 5 ) Examples of other receipts that are not considered program i ncome are proceeds from fund raising activities caiTied
out by subrec ipients receiving CDBG assistance ( the costs of fundrais ing are generally unallowable under the applicable
Otv[B c irculars referenced in 24 CFR 84.27), funds collected through special assessments used to recover the non-CDBG
potiion of a public improvement, and proceeds from the disposition of real property acquired or improved with COBO
funds when the disposition occurs after the applicable time period specified in § 570.503 ( b )( 8 ) for subrecipient-control led
property, o r in § 5 70 .505 for recipient-contro lled prope1iy.
(b) Revolving fund means a separate fund (with a set of accounts that are independent o f other program accounts) established
for the purpose of carrying out specific activities which, in turn, generate payments to the fund for use in carrying out the same
activities. Each revolving loan fund's cash balance must be held in an interest-bearing account, and any interest paid on CDBG
funds held i n this account shall be considered interest earned on grant advances an d must be remitted to HUD for transmittal
to the U . S . Treasury no less frequently than annually. ( Interest paid by borrowers on e ligible loans made from the revolving
loan fund shall be program income and treated accord ingly. )
(c) S ubrecipient means a pub l ic or private nonprofit agency, authority, or organization, or a for-profit entity authorized under §
5 70.20 I ( o ), receivi ng CDBG funds from the recipient or another subrecipient to undertake activities eligible for such assistance
under subpart C of this part. The term excludes an entity receiving CDBG funds from the recipient under the authority of §
5 70 .204, unless the grantee explicitly designates it as a subrecipient. The term includes a public agency designated by a unit of
general local government to receive a loan guarantee under subpart M of this part, but does not include contractors providing
supplies, equ ipment, construction, or services subject to the procurement requirements in 2 CFR part 200, subpart D .
Credits
[53 FR 4 1 3 3 1 , Oct. 2 1 , 1 988; 57 FR 27 1 20 , June 1 7, 1 992; 60 FR 1 95 2 , Jan. 5, 1 995 ; 60 FR 1 7446 , April 6, 1 995; 60 F R
569 1 4 , Nov. 9 , 1 995; 80 F R 7 5 9 3 7 , Dec . 7 , 20 1 5]
SOURCE: 40 FR 24693 , June 9, 1 975; 50 FR 3 7 5 2 5 , Sept. 1 6, I 985; 50 FR 3 909 1 , S ept. 27, 1 98 5 ; 5 3 FR 8058, March 1 1 ,
1 988; 53 FR 3 1 23 9 , Aug. I 7, 1 988; 53 FR 3443 7, Sept. 6, 1 988; 54 FR 3 1 672, Aug. I , 1 989; 55 F R 1 8494, May 2, 1 990; 5 6
FR 4 I 9 3 8 , Aug. 26, 1 99 1 ; 5 6 FR 56 1 26 , Oct. 3 1 , 1 99 1 ; 56 F R 56906, Nov. 6, 1 99 1 ; 57 F R 2 7 1 1 9, June l 7, 1 992; 57 FR 4006 7 ,
Sept. I , 1 992; 5 7 FR 5 3 397, Nov. 9, 1 992; 59 FR 6 6 5 9 8 , Dec. 27, 1 994; 6 1 FR 5 209, Feb. 9, 1 996; 62 FR 629 1 4, Nov. 2 5 ,
1 997; 8 1 FR 90659, Dec . 1 4, 20 1 6, unless otherwise noted.
AUTHORITY: 12 U . S . C . 1 70 I x, 1 70 I x- 1 : 42 U . S .C. 3 5 3 5 ( d ) and 53 0 1 -5 3 20 .
Current through July 9, 2020; 85 FR 4 1 3 1 9 .
E n d o r D o r u mcn l { 􀃄 ( l 􀃅 l l Thorn􀃆nn Re uti.:rs N l l ch11m 111 nrig111al 1 1 S C iun:.:mmeru \\ ork<;
§ 570.503 A g reements with s u b recipie nts., 24 C.F.R. § 570.503
Code of Federal Regulations
Title 24. Housing and Urban Development
Subtitle B. Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban Development
Chapter V. Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and Development, Department of
Housing and Urban Development ( Refs & Annas)
Subchapter C. Community Facilities
Part 570 . Community Development Block Grants (Refs & Annos)
Subpart J. Grant Administration (Refs & Annas)
24 C.F.R. § 570.503
§ 570 .503 Agreements with subrecipients.
Effective: January 6, 2016
Currentness
(a) Before disbmsing any CDBG funds to a subrecipient, the recipient shall sign a written agreement with the subrecipient.
The agreement shall remain in effect during any period that the subrecipient has control over CDBG funds, including program
income.
(b) At a minimum, the written agreement with the subrecipient shall include provisions concerning the following items:
( I ) Statement of work. The agreement shall incl ude a description of the work to be performed, a schedule for completing
the work, and a budget. These items shall be in sufficient detail to provide a sound basis for the recipient effectively to
monitor perfomrnnce under the agreement.
(2) Records and reports. The recipient shall specify in the agreement the particular records the subrecipient must maintain
and the pa1ticular reports the subrecipient must submit in order to assist the recipient in meeting its recordkeeping and
repo1ting requirements.
( 3 ) Program income. The agreement shall include the program income requirements set forth in § 570.504( c ) . The
agreement shall also specify that, at the end of the program year, the grantee may require remittance of all or part of any
program income balances (including investments thereof) held by the subrecipient (except those needed for immediate
cash needs, cash balances of a revolving loan fund, cash balances from a lump sum drawdown, or cash or investments
held for section I 08 security needs).
(4) Uni form requirements. The agreement shall require the subrecipient to comply with applicable uniform requirements,
as described in § 570.502.
(5) Other program requirements. The agreement shall require the subrecipient to carry out each activity in compliance with
all Federal laws and regulations described in subpart K of these regulations, except that:
WESTLAW r, 2 0 2 0 n1nr 1 1 <;017 R .:, u t dlS N o c l ,Jiill tn 0 1 1 q 1 n ci l I J s r.;ov21 1 1 m A n l l/1/ork s
§ 570.503 Ag reements with s ubrecipients., 24 C.F. R . § 570.503
( i) The subrecipient does not assume the rec ipient's environmental responsibil i t ies described at § 5 70.604 ; and
( i i ) The subrecipient does not assume the recipi ent's responsibility for i n itiating the review process under the provisions
o f 24 CFR part 5 2 .
(6) Suspension and termination . The agreement shall set forth remed ies for noncompliance and provisions on termination
in accordance with 2 CFR part 200, subpart D.
(7) Reversion of assets. The agreement shal l specify that upon its expiration the subrecipient shall transfer to the recipient
any CDBG funds on hand at the time of expiration and any accounts receivable attributable to the use of CDBG funds. It
shall also include provi s ions designed to ensure that any real property u nder the subrecipient's control that was acquired
or improved in whole or in pati with CDBG funds ( including CDBG funds provided to the subrecipient in the form of a
loan) in excess of $25,000 is either:
(i) Used to meet o ne of the national objectives in § 5 70.208 ( formerly § 5 70.90 I ) until five years after expiration of the
agreement, or for such longer period of time as dete1rn ined to be appropriate by the recipient; or
( i i ) Not u sed in accordance with paragraph ( b )(7 )( i ) of this section, in which event the subrecipient shall pay to the reci pient
an amount equal to the current market value of the property less any portion of the value attributable to expenditures o f
non-CD BG funds for the acquisition of, o r improvement to, the p roperty. The payment is program income to the recipient.
(No payment is required after the period of time spec ified in paragraph (b )(7)( i) of this section. )
Credits
[53 FR 4 1 3 3 1 , Oct. 2 1 , I 9 8 8 ; 57 FR 2 7 1 20, June 1 7, I 992; 60 FR 569 1 5 , Nov. 9, I 995; 68 FR 56405, Sept. 30, 2003 ; 80 FR
69873, Nov. 1 2, 20 1 5 ; 80 F R 7593 8, Dec. 7, 20 1 5]
SOURCE: 40 FR 24693 , June 9, 1 97 5 ; 50 FR 3 7525 , Sept. 1 6, 1 98 5 ; 50 F R 3 909 1 , Sept. 27, I 985; 53 FR 805 8 , March 1 1 ,
1 98 8 ; 5 3 FR 3 1 239, A ug. 1 7, 1 988; 5 3 FR 3443 7, Sept. 6, 1 988; 54 FR 3 1 6 72, Aug. I , 1 989; 55 FR 1 8494, May 2, 1 990; 5 6
F R 4 1 93 8 , Aug. 2 6 , 1 9 9 1 ; 5 6 FR 56 1 26, Oct. 3 1 , 1 99 1 ; 56 F R 56906, Nov. 6, 1 99 1 ; 57 F R 2 7 1 1 9, June 1 7, 1 992; 57 FR 40067,
Sept. I , 1 992; 57 FR 5 3397, Nov. 9, 1 992; 59 FR 66598, Dec. 27, 1 994; 6 1 FR 5 209, Feb. 9, 1 996; 62 FR 629 1 4 , Nov. 25,
1 997; 8 1 FR 90659, Dec. 1 4, 20 1 6 , unless otherwise noted.
AUTHORITY: 1 2 U . S .C. 1 70 l x, 1 70 1 x- 1 ; 42 U .S C . 3 5 3 5 ( d ) and 530 1 -5 3 2 0 .
Notes o f Dec i sions ( 2 )
Current through July 3 0 , 2020, 85 F R 45808.
E n d o r D,n· u m,·ut 2020 T hu111son Reuters Nu l'.lc11111 Lo or1g1 11::d I J S Gove-rnml'nt \.\·urks
§ 570.504 Program income., 24 C.F.R. § 570.504
Code of Federal Regulations
Title 24. Housing and Urban Development
Subtitle B. Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban Development
Chapter V. Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and Development, Department of
Housing and Urban Development (Refs & Annos)
Subchapter C . Community Facilities
Part 570 . Community Development Block Grants (Refs & Annos)
Subpart J. Grant Administration (Refs & An nos)
24 C.F.R. § 570.504
§ 570.504 Program income.
Effective: May 23, 2012
Currentness
(a) Recording program income. The receipt and expenditure of program income as defined in § 570 .SOO(a) shall be recorded
as pa1t of the financial transactions of the grant program.
(b) Disposition of program income received by recipients.
( I ) Program income received before grant closeout may be retained by the recipient if the income is treated as additional
CDBG funds subject to all applicable requirements governing the use of CDBG funds.
( 2 ) If the reci pient chooses to retain program income, that program income shall be disposed of as follows:
(i) Program income in the form of repayments to, o r interest earned on, a revolving fund as defined in § 5 70 .SOO(b) shall
be substantial ly d isbursed from the fund before additional cash withdrawals are made from the U .S. Treasury for the same
activity. (This rule does not prevent a lump sum disbursement to finance the rehabilitation of privately owned prope1ties
as provided for in § 5 70 .5 1 3 . )
( i i ) Substantially all other program income shall b e d isbursed for eligible activities before additional cash withdrawals are
m ade from the U . S . Treasury.
( i i i ) At the end of each program year, the aggregate amount of program income cash balances and any investment thereof
( except those needed for immediate cash needs, cash balances of a revolving loan fund, cash balances from a lump-sum
drawdown, or cash or investments held for section 1 08 loan guarantee security needs) that, as of the last day of the program
year, exceeds one-twelfth of the most recent grant made pursuant to § 570.304 shall be remitted to HUD as soon as
practicable thereafter, to be placed in the recipient's line of credit. This provision applies to program income cash balances
and investments thereof held by the grantee and its subrecipients. (This provision shall be applied for the first time at the
end of the program year for which Federal Fiscal Year 1 996 funds are provided.)
WESTLAW ''· 20?0 T \ i ,:, 1 11 ;,.i 1 1 r􀫑 􀫒,ut0rs f\lo c l :1 1 1 r t,J mreJ i n a l \ J S Gowc;rnment Wo rk s
§ 570.504 P rogram income . , 24 C.F.R. § 570.504
(3) Program income on hand at the time of c loseout shall continue to be subject to the eligibil ity requirements in subpart
C and all other applicable provisions of this part until it is expended.
(4) Un less otherwise provided in any grant closeout agreement, and subject to the requirements of paragraph ( b )( 5 ) of this
section, i ncome received a fter c loseout shall not be governed by the provisions of this part, except that, i f at the time of
c loseout the recipient has another ongoing CDBG grant received directly from HUD, funds received after closeout shall
be treated as program i ncome o f the ongoing grant program .
( 5 ) I f the recipient does not have another ongoing grant received directly from HUD at the time of closeout, income received
after c loseout from the d isposition of real prope11y or from loans outstand ing at the time of closeout shall not be governed
by the provisions of this part, except that such income shall be used for activities that meet one of the national objectives
in § 570.90 1 and the eligibil ity requirements described in section 1 0 5 of the Act.
( c ) Disposition of program income received by subrecipients. The written agreement between the recipient and the subrecipient,
as required by § 5 70.503, shall specify whether program income received is to be returned to the recipient or retained by the
subrecipient. Where program income is to be retained by the subrecipient, the agreement shall specify the activities that will
be unde11aken with the program income and that all provisions of the written agreement shall apply to the specified activities.
When the subrecipient retains program income, transfers of grant funds by the recipient to the subrecipient shal l be adj usted
according to the principles described in paragraphs (6)( 2 ) ( i ) and (ii) of th is section. Any program income on hand when the
agreement expires, or received after the agreement's expiration, shall be paid to the recipient as required by § 570.503(6)( 8 ).
(d) D isposition of certain program income received by urban counties . Program income derived from urban county program
activities unde1taken by or within the j urisdiction of a unit o f general local government which thereafter terminates its
partic ipation in the urban county shall continue to be program income of the urban county. The urban county may transfer the
program income to the unit o f general local government, upon its term ination of urban county participation, provided that the
unit o f general local government has become an entitlement grantee and agrees to use the program income i n its own C DBG
entitlement program.
(e)( 1 ) Transfer of program income to Entitlement program. A unit o f general local government that becomes eligible to be
an Entitlement grantee may request the state's approval to transfer State CDBG grant-generated program income to the unit
of general local government's Entitlement program. A state may approve the transfer, provided that the unit o f general local
government:
( i ) Has officially elected to participate in the Entitlement grant program;
( i i ) Agrees to use such program i ncome in accordance with Entitlement program requirements; and
( i i i ) Has set up Integrated Disbursement and Information System ( !D I S ) access and agrees to enter receipt of program
income into !DIS.
WEST L AW 2
§ 570.504 Program i n c ome., 24 C.F.R. § 570.504
(2) Transfer o f program income of grantees losing Entitlement status. Upon entry into the State CDBG program, a unit of
general local government that has lost or relinquished its Entitlement status must, with respect to program income that a
unit of general local government would otherwise be permitted to retain, e ither:
( i ) Retain the program i ncome generated under Entitlement grants and continue to comply with Entitlement program
requirements for program income; or
( i i ) Retain the program income and transfer it to the State CDBG program, in which case the unit of general local
government must comply with the state's rules for program income and the requirements of § 5 70.489( e ) .
Credits
[60 FR 569 I 5, Nov. 9, 1 995; 77 FR 24 1 46, April 23, 20 1 2)
SOURCE: 40 FR 24693, June 9, 1 97 5 ; 50 FR 37525, Sept. 1 6, 1 9 8 5 ; 50 FR 3909 1 , Sept. 27, 1 98 5 ; 5 3 FR 8058, March I I ,
1 98 8 ; 53 FR 3 1 23 9, Aug. 1 7, 1 988; 53 FR 34437, Sept. 6, 1 988; 5 4 FR 3 1 672, Aug. I , 1 989; 5 5 FR 1 8494, May 2, 1 990; 56
FR 4 1 938, Aug. 26, 1 99 1 ; 56 FR 5 6 1 26, Oct. 3 1 , 1 99 1 ; 56 FR 5 6906, Nov. 6, 1 99 1 ; 5 7 FR 2 7 1 1 9, June 1 7, 1 992; 57 F R 40067,
Sept. I , 1 992; 5 7 FR 5 3 397, Nov. 9, 1 992; 5 9 F R 66598, Dec. 27, 1 994; 6 1 FR 5 209, Feb. 9, 1 996; 62 F R 629 1 4 , Nov. 25,
1 997; 81 FR 90659, Dec. 14, 20 1 6 , u nless otherwise noted.
AUTHORITY: 12 U.S.C. l 70 I x, 1 70 l x-1 ; 42 U .S.C. 3 5 3 5 ( d ) and 530 1 -5 3 2 0 .
Notes of Decisions ( I )
Current through J u ly 30, 2020, 8 5 FR 4 5 80 8 .
E n d o f Dornmrnt L' 21120 Thnmson Reuters Nu .:l□1m tu ungin;il lJ S Gu, ernmcm \\'urks
WESTLAW ,,· 2 0 '2 0 f 1 1 01 1 1 3 J 1 1 R m1 l c r s I\ J o c l a 1 1 1 1 to 0 1 1 s-.1 1 ri a l l J S C o v arnrki n l \J\/,Jr!, s 3
§ 570.502 Applicability of u n i form a d m i n i strative req u i rements., 24 C.F.R. § 570.502
Attach m e n t 3
Code of Federal Regulations
Title 24. Housing a nd Urban Development
Subtitle B. Regulations Relating to H ousing a n d Urban Development
Chapter V. Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and Development, Department of
Housing a nd Urban Development (Refs & Annas)
Subchapter C. Community Facilities
Part 570. Community Development Block Grants (Refs & Annos)
Subpart J. Grant Administration (Refs & Annas)
24 C.F.R. § 570 .502
§ 570.502 Applicability of uniform administrative requirements.
Effective: January 6, 2016
Currentness
(a) Grantees and subrecipients shall comply with 2 CFR pait 200, "Uni form Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and
Audit Requirements for Federal Awards", except that:
( I ) Section 200.305 "Payment" is modified for lump sum drawdown for financing of property rehabilitation activities, in
accordance with § 570 . 5 1 3 .
(2) Section 200.306 "Cost sharing or matchi ng'' does not apply.
( 3 ) Section 200.307 "Program income" does not apply. Program income is governed by § 5 70.504 .
( 4) Section 200.308 "Revi s ions o f budget and program plans" does not apply.
( 5 ) Section 200.3 1 1 "Real property" does not apply, except as provided in § 5 70.200(.i l. Real property is governed by §
570.505.
(6) Section 200.3 1 3 "Equipment" app l i es, except that when the equipm ent is sold, the proceeds shall be program income.
Equipment not needed by the subrecipient for CDBG activities shall be transferred to the recipient for the CDBG program
or shall be retained after compensating the recipient.
(7) Section 2 00.333 "Retention requirements for records" applies except that:
( i ) For recipients:
(A) The period shall be 4 years from the date of execution of the closeout agreem ent for a grant, as further described
in th is part;
---------- ---·--- ·-
WESTLAW
§ 570.502 Applicabil ity of u n iform a d m i n i strative requirements., 24 C . F.R. § 570.502
(8) Records for indivi dual activities subject to the reversion of assets provisions at § 570.503(6)(7) or the change of
use provisions at § 5 70.505 must be maintained for 3 years after those provisions no longer apply to the activity;
(C) Records for individual activities for which there are outstandi ng loan balances, other receivables, or contingent
l iabil ities must be retained for 3 years after the receivables or l iabilities have been satisfied.
( i i) For subrecipients :
(A) The retention period for individual CD8G activities shall be the longer of3 years after the expiration or tem1 i natio11
of the subrecipient agreement under § 570.503, or 3 years after the submission of the annual performance and
evaluation report, as prescribed in § 9 1 .520 of this title, in which the specific activity is repotted on for the final time;
( 8 ) Records for ind ividual activities subject to the reversion of assets provisions at § 570.503 ( 6 )( 7 ) or change of use
provisions at § 5 70.505 must be maintained for as long as those provisions continue to apply to the activity; and
(C) Records for indivi dual activities for which there are outstanding loan balances, other receivables, or contingent
liab i l ities must be retained until such receivables or l iabilities have been satisfied.
( 8 ) Section 200.343 "Closeout" applies to closeout of subrecipients.
(b) [Reserved)
Credits
[57 FR 3 3256, July 27, 1 992; 59 FR 2738, Jan. 1 9, 1 994; 60 FR 1 9 1 6 , Jan. 5, 1 995; 60 FR 569 1 5 , Nov. 9, 1 995; 80 FR 7593 7 ,
Dec. 7, 20 1 5)
SOURCE: 40 FR 24693, June 9, 1 975; 50 FR 37525, S ept. 1 6, 1 98 5 ; 50 FR 3909 1 , Sept. 27, 1 98 5 ; 53 FR 8058, March 1 1 ,
1 988; 53 FR 3 1 23 9 , Aug. 1 7, 1 988; 53 FR 3443 7 , Sept. 6, 1 98 8 ; 54 FR 3 1 672, Aug. I , 1 989; 55 FR 1 8494, May 2, 1 990; 56
F R 4 I 938, Aug. 26, 1 99 1 ; 5 6 F R 56 1 26 , Oct. 3 1 , 1 99 1 ; 5 6 FR 56906, Nov. 6, 1 99 1 ; 57 F R 27 1 1 9, June 1 7, 1 992; 57 FR 40067,
Sept. I , 1 992; 57 FR 53397, Nov. 9, 1 992; 59 FR 66598, Dec. 27, 1 994; 6 1 FR 5209, Feb. 9, 1 996; 62 FR 629 1 4 , Nov. 25,
1 997; 81 F R 90659, Dec . 1 4, 20 1 6, unless otherwise noted.
AUTHORITY: 12 U.S .C. 1 70 I x , 1 70 l x- l ; 42 U . S .C. 3 5 3 5 ( d ) and 530 l -5320.
Current through July 9, 2020; 85 F R 4 1 3 l 9.
E n d o f Durn 11u· n t i., 21 120 T I H 1 1 1 iso11 Reuters No 􀃇 l a 1 1 1 1 t u ungrnal I J S GovernmL'lll \\'ur ks
WESTLAW 2 02() n,01 1 1 s011 !􀄜ou ters i'Jo c l a i m to :Jc19 1 1v 1 I U . S f3over1rn1ent Wor k s 2
T. 24, S u bt. B, C h . V, Su bch. C , Pt. 570, S u bpt. K, Refs & Annas, C . F.R. T. 24, Su bt. B, ...
Attachment 4
Code of Federal Regulations
Title 24. Housing and Urban Development
Subtitle B. Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban Development
Credits
Chapter V. Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and Development, Department of
Housing and Urban Development
Subchapter C. Community Facilities
Part 570 . Community Development Block Grants
Subpart K. Other Program Requirements
C.F.R. T. 24, Subt. B, Ch. V, Subch. C, Pt. 570, Subpt. K, Refs & Annas
Currentness
Source: 5 3 FR 34456, Sept. 6, 1 98 8 ; 53 FR 4022 1 , Oct. 1 4, 1 988, unless otherwise noted.
Cun-ent through July 9, 2020; 85 FR 4 1 3 1 9 .
End o f l l o r n 11 1 r 1 1 I t 2.0211 Tllo111so11 lkuters Nv cla1111 to onginJI IJ S Go,·ern1111.::nt \\'1)rk s
WEST LAW
§ 570.600 General., 24 C.F.R. § 570.600
Code of Federal Regulations
Title 24. H ousing and Urban Development
Subtitle B. Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban Development
Chapter V. Office of Assistant Secreta11' for Community Planning and Development, Depmtment of
Housing and Urban Development (Refs & Annas)
Subchapter C. Community Facilities
Part 570. Community Development Block Grants (Refs & Annos)
Subpmt K. Other Program Requirements (Refs & Annas)
24 C.F.R. § 570 . 600
§ 570.600 General.
Effective: April 16, 2007
Currentness
(a) This subpa1t K enumerates laws that the Secretary will treat as applicable to grants made under section 1 06 of the Act, other
than grants to states made pursuant to section 1 06(d) of the Act, for purposes of the Secretary's detem, inations under section
I 04( e )( I ) of the Act, including statutes expressly made applicable by the Act and ce1tain other statutes and Executive Orders
for which the Secretary has enforcement responsibility. This subpart K applies to grants made under the Insular Areas Program
in § 570.405 and § 570.440 with the exception of § 5 70.6 1 2 . The absence of mention herein of any other statute for which the
Secretary does not have direct enforcement responsibility is not intended to be taken as an indication that, in the Secretaiy's
opinion, such statute or Executive Order is not applicable to activities assisted under the Act. For laws that the Secretary will
treat as applicable to grants made to states under section I 06(d) of the Act for purposes of the determination required to be
made by the Secretary pursuant to section 1 04(e)(2) of the Act, see § 570.487.
(b) This subpmt also sets forth ce1tain additional program requirements which the Secretary has determined to be applicable to
grants provided under the Act as a matter o f administrative discretion.
(c} In addition to grants made pursuant to section 1 06(b) and 1 06(d)(2}(8} of the Act (subpaits D and F, respectively), the
requirements of this subpa1t K are applicable to grants made pursuant to sections I 07 and 1 1 9 of the Act (subpa1ts E and G,
respectively), and to loans guaranteed pursuant to subpart l'vl.
Credits
[60 FR 569 1 6 , Nov. 9, 1 99 5 ; 6 1 FR 1 1 477, March 20, 1 996; 72 FR 1 25 3 6 , March 1 5 , 2007]
SOURCE: 40 FR 24693 , June 9, 1 97 5 ; 5 0 F R 3 7 5 2 5 , Sept. 1 6, 1 98 5 ; 50 FR 3 909 1 . Sept. 27. 1 98 5 ; 5 3 FR 3 1 23 9 , Aug. 1 7 ,
1 98 8 ; 53 FR 3443 7 , Sept. 6, 1 98 8 ; 5 3 FR 34456, Sept. 6, 1 98 8 ; 53 FR 4022 1 , Oct. 1 4, 1 9 8 8 ; 54 FR 3 1 672, Aug. I , 1 989; 5 5 F R
1 8494, M a y 2, 1 990; 5 6 FR 4 1 93 8 , A u g . 2 6 , 1 99 1 ; 56 F R 5 6 1 26, Oct. 3 1 , 1 99 1 ; 5 6 FR 56906, Nov. 6, 1 99 1 ; 5 7 FR 27 1 1 9, June
1 7, 1 992; 5 7 FR 40067, Sept. I, 1 992; 5 7 FR 5 3 3 97, Nov. 9, 1 992; 59 FR 66598, Dec. 27, 1 994; 6 1 FR 5 209, Feb. 9, 1 996; 6 2
FR 629 1 4, Nov. 2 5 , 1 997; 8 1 F R 90659, Dec. 1 4, 20 1 6 , unless otherwise noted.
AUTHORITY: 1 2 U .S . C . 1 70 1 x, 1 70 1 x- 1 ; 42 U . S . C . 3 5 3 5 ( d ) and 5 3 0 1 -5 3 2 0 .
--·- - -- -·- - ----- ----------·------ -----
WESTLAW ,r , 202r1 Tho1 1 1 3/Jll F􀓝21.i l ," 1 s f\J.J r:: l a i 111 t, , ,,1 19 1 1 1 ,-1 1 U S L1 cJVern,11t:! r i t V\/<J r􀓞.s
§ 570.600 G e n era I . , 24 C. F.R. § 570.600
Current through July 9, 2020; 85 FR 4 1 3 1 9.
E n d of l lnrn111rnt <. 2020 T homson 1\1,;utl'.rS Nl1 c h1 1 m tn o r 1 g 1 1 ia l U S ( jpn.·rn111􀀻111 \\urks
WEST LAW
§ 570.601 Public Law 88-352 and Public Law 90-284; ... , 24 C.F.R. § 570.601
KeyCile Yellow Flag - Negative Treatment
Proposed Regulation
Code of Federal Regulations
Title 24. Housing and Urban Development
Subtitle B . Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban Development
Chapter V. Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and Development, Department of
Housing and Urban Development (Refs & Annas)
Subchapter C. Community Facilities
Part 570. Community Development Block Grants ( Refs & Annas)
Subpart K. Other Program Requirements (Refs & Annos)
24 C.F.R. § 570.601
§ 570.601 Public Law 88-352 and Public Law 9 0-284;
affirmatively furthering fair housing; Executive Order 11063.
Effective: August 17, 2015
Currentness
(a} The following requirements apply according to sections 1 04(6) and 1 07 of the Act:
( 1 ) Public Law 8 8-3 5 2 , which is title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1 964 (42 U .S.C. 2000d et seq . ), and implementing
regulations in 24 CFR part I .
(2) Public Law 90-284, which is the Fair Housing Act (42 U . S .C . 360 1 - 3 620). In accordance with the Fair Housing Act,
the Secretary requires that grantees administer all programs and activities related to housing and urban development in
a manner to affirmatively further the policies of the Fair Housing Act. Fmthermore, in accordance with section 1 04(6)
(2) of the Act, for each community receiving a grant under subpart D of this part, the certification that the grantee will
affirmatively further fair housing shall specifically require the grantee to take meaningful actions to further the goals
i dentified in the grantee's AFH conducted in accordance with the requirements of 24 CFR 5 . 1 50 through 5. l 80 and take
no action that is materially inconsistent with its obligation to affirmatively fmther fair housing.
(b) Executive Order 1 1 063, as amended by Executive Order 1 2259 (3 CFR, 1 95 9- 1 963 Comp., p. 652; 3 CFR, 1 980 Comp., p.
3 0 7 ) (Equal Opportunity in Housing), and implementing regulations in 24 CFR part I 07, also apply.
Credits
[54 FR 374 1 1 , Sept. 8, 1 989; 60 FR 1 9 1 7 , Jan. 5, 1 995; 6 1 FR 1 1 4 77, March 20, 1 996; 80 FR 42368, July 1 6, 20 1 5]
SOURCE: 40 F R 24693, June 9, 1 97 5 ; 5 0 F R 3 7525, Sept. 1 6 , 1 985; 50 FR 3909 1 , Sept. 27. 1 98 5 ; 5 3 F R 3 1 239. Aug. 1 7,
1 98 8 ; 53 F R 3443 7, Sept. 6, 1 988; 53 FR 34456, Sept. 6, 1 98 8; 53 F R 4022 1 , Oct. 1 4, 1 98 8 ; 54 FR 3 1 672, Aug. I , 1 989; 5 5 FR
1 8494, May 2, 1 990; 56 FR 4 1 938, Aug. 26, 1 99 1 ; 56 FR 56 1 26, Oct. 3 1 , 1 99 I ; 56 F R 56906, Nov. 6. 1 99 1 ; 57 FR 27 1 I 9, June
1 7, 1 992; 57 FR 40067, Sept. I , 1 992; 57 FR 5 3 397, Nov. 9, 1 992; 59 FR 66598, Dec. 27, 1 994; 6 1 FR 5 209, Feb. 9, 1 996; 62
FR 629 1 4, Nov. 2 5 , 1 997; 8 1 FR 90659, Dec. 1 4, 20 1 6, unless otherw ise noted.
WESTLAW ,; ' 2 0.20 l"l 10 1 1 1 so 1 1 R au l e r s 􀄴􀄵 o c l '3 i l11 to O rt (J 1 1 1 a l l J S Go 1Jeri rn 1 e n l \J\Jur k s
§ 570. 6 0 1 Public Law 8 8-352 a n d Public Law 90-284; . . . , 24 C . F.R. § 570.601
- . - · ------- -- ----·------- ------ . ··-----------
AUTHORITY: 1 2 U . S.C. 1 70 I x, 1 70 I x-1 ; 42 U S. C . 3 5 35(d) and 530 1 -5 3 2 0 .
Notes o f Decisions ( 3 )
Cun-ent through J uly 9, 2020; 8 5 FR 4 1 3 1 9.
---- -•·--- •---- - --------
E n d nf Dorn11 1 c 1 1 I l 2010 Thumst)ll Rcu1cr., Nn c\,11111 10 nriginal l 1.􀇢 Gon􀇣rrnnent \\°nils
----------
WESTLAW
§ 570.602 Section 1 09 of the Act., 24 C . F.R. § 570.602
Code of Federal Regulations
Title 24. H ousing and Urban Development
Subtitle B. Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban Development
Chapter V. Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and Development, Depa1tment of
Housing and Urban Development (Refs & Annas)
Subchapter C. Community Facilities
Part 570. Community D evelopment Block Grants ( Refs & Annas)
Subpart K. Other Program Requirements (Refs & Annas)
24 C.F.R. § 570.602
§ 570.602 Section 109 of the Act.
Currentness
Section I 09 of the Act requires that no person in the United States shall on the grounds of race, color, national origin, religion,
or sex be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any program or
activity receiving Federal financial assistance made available pursuant to the Act. Section 1 09 also directs that the prohibitions
against discrimination on the basis of age under the Age Discrimination Act and the prohibitions against discrimination on the
basis of disabil ity under Section 5 04 shall apply to programs or activities receiving Federal financial assistance under Title I
programs. The policies and procedures necessary to ensure enforcement of section 1 09 are codified in 24 CFR pa11 6.
Credits
[60 FR 569 1 6 , Nov. 9, 1 995; 64 FR 3 802, Jan. 25, 1 999]
SOURCE: 40 FR 24693 , June 9, 1 975; 50 FR 3 7 5 1 5 , Sept. 1 6, 1 985; 50 FR 3909 1 , Sept. 27, 1 98 5 ; 53 FR 3 1 239, Aug. I 7,
1 98 8 ; 53 FR 3443 7 , Sept. 6, 1 988; 53 FR 3445 6 , Sept. 6, 1 98 8 ; 53 FR 4022 1 , Oct. 1 4, 1 988; 54 FR 3 1 672, Aug. 1 , 1 989; 55 FR
1 8494, May 2, 1 990; 56 FR 4 1 93 8 , Aug. 26, 1 99 1 ; 56 FR 56 1 26, Oct. 3 1 , 1 99 1 ; 56 FR 56906, Nov. 6, 1 99 1 ; 57 FR 27 1 1 9 , June
1 7, 1 992; 57 FR 40067, Sept. I , 1 992; 57 FR 5 3 3 9 7 , Nov. 9, 1 992; 59 FR 66598, Dec. 27, 1 994; 6 1 FR 5209, Feb. 9, 1 996; 62
FR 629 1 4, Nov. 2 5 , 1 997; 8 1 FR 90659, Dec. 1 4, 20 1 6, unless otherwise noted.
AUTHORJTY: 12 U . S .C. 1 70 I x, 1 70 I x-1 ; 42 U .S.C. 3 5 3 5 ( d ) and 530 1 -5320.
Current through July 9, 2020; 85 FR 4 1 3 1 9.
End of Oorumcul c 2t)20 Th11111so11 Rc:ulers. No dr11111 Iv origin:.il 1 1 S. Gon·rnmenl \Vorks
WESTLAW ,:· , 2 0 2 0 T h n1 1 1 s o 1 1 R c; 1 1 1 a r s f\Jo c l a 1 1 1 1 to 0 1 1 y 1 n a l l J S C nvari 1 m e n t V\/u ;-ks
§ 570.603 Labor standards., 24 C . F. R . § 570.603
Code of Federal Regulations
Title 24. H o using and Urban Development
Subtitle B. Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban Development
Chapter V. Office of Assistant Secreta1y for Community Planning and Development, Department of
Housing and Urban Development (Refs & Annas)
Subchapter C. Community Facilities
Part 570 . Community Development Block Grants (Refs & Annas)
Subpatt K. Other Program Requirements ( Refs & Annos)
24 C.F.R. § 570.603
§ 570.603 Labor standards.
Currentness
(a) Section 1 1 O(a) of the Act contains labor standards that apply to nonvolunteer l abor financed in whole or in part with assistance
received under the Act. In accordance with section l l O(a) of the Act, the Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act (40
U . S .C. 3 2 7 et seq . ) also app l ies. However, these requirements apply to the rehabilitation of residential prope1ty only i f such
property contains not less than 8 units.
(b) The regulations in 24 CFR part 7 0 apply to the use of volunteers.
Credits
[ 5 7 FR 1 4759, April 22, 1 992; 6 1 FR 1 1 477, March 20, 1 996]
SOURCE: 40 FR 2469 3 , June 9, 1 97 5 ; 50 FR 3 7 5 2 5 , Sept. 1 6 , 1 985; 50 FR 3 909 I , Sept. 27, 1 985; 53 FR 3 l 239, Aug. 1 7,
l 988; 53 FR 3443 7, Sept. 6, l 988; 53 F R 3 44 5 6 , Sept. 6, 1 98 8; 5 3 FR 4022 l , Oct. 1 4, l 988; 54 FR 3 1 672, Aug. 1 , l 989; 5 5 FR
I 8 494, May 2 , 1 990; 5 6 FR 4 1 9 3 8 , Aug. 26, 1 99 1 ; 56 FR 5 6 1 26, Oct. 3 1 , 1 99 1 ; 56 F R 56906, Nov. 6, 1 99 1 ; 5 7 FR 27 l I 9, June
l 7, 1 992; 57 FR 40067, Sept. I , 1 992; 57 FR 5 3 397, Nov. 9, 1 992; 59 FR 6659 8 , Dec. 27, 1 994; 6 1 FR 5209, Feb. 9, 1 996; 62
FR 629 l 4, Nov. 2 5 , 1997; 8 1 FR 906 59, Dec. 1 4, 20 1 6, unless otherwise noted.
AUTHORITY: 1 2 U . S . C . l 70 l x, 1 70 I x- 1 ; 42 U .S.C. 3 5 3 5 ( d ) and 5 3 0 1 -5 3 2 0 .
N otes of Dec isions ( 3 )
Current through J u ly 9 , 2020; 85 F R 4 1 3 1 9.
E11d of l.lornmenl l.. 􀀸02(1 Thurnsu1 1 lkult:1 s Nn c!J1m to orig.ma! U S ( i11, 􀀹1 11111e111 \\·orks
WESTLAW
§ 570.604 Environmental sta n da rds., 24 C.F.R. § 570.604
Code of Federal Regulations
Title 24. Housing and Urban Development
Subtitle B . Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban Development
Chapter V. Office of Assistant Secretaiy for Community Planning and Development, Department of
Housing and Urban Development (Refs & Annos)
Subchapter C. Community Facilities
Part 570 . Community Development Block Grants (Refs & Annos)
Subpart K. Other Program Requirements (Refs & Annos)
24 C.F.R. § 570.604
§ 570.604 Environmental standards.
Currentness
For purposes of section 1 04(g) of the Act, the regulations in 24 CFR part 58 speci fy the other provisions of law which
futther the purposes of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1 969, and the procedures by which grantees must fulfill
their environmental responsibilities. In certain cases, grantees assume these environmental review, decisionmaking, and action
responsibilities by execution of grant agreements with the Secretary.
Credits
[6 1 FR l l 477, March 20, l 996]
SOURCE: 40 FR 24693, June 9, 1 975; 50 FR 37525 , Sept. 1 6, 1 98 5 ; 50 FR 3909 1 , Sept. 27, 1 98 5 ; 53 FR 3 1 239, Aug. 1 7,
1 988; 5 3 FR 3443 7 , Sept. 6, 1 98 8 ; 53 FR 3 4456, Sept. 6, l 988; 53 FR 402 2 1 , Oct. 1 4, 1 988; 54 FR 3 1 672, Aug. 1 , 1 989; 55 F R
1 8494, May 2 , 1 990; 5 6 FR 4 1 93 8 , Aug. 26, l 99 1 ; 56 FR 56 1 26, Oct. 3 1 , 1 99 l ; 56 FR 56906, Nov. 6, I 99 1 ; 5 7 FR 2 7 1 I 9, June
1 7, l 992; 57 FR 40067, Sept. I, 1 992: 57 FR 53397, Nov. 9, 1 992; 59 FR 66598, Dec. 27, 1 994; 6 1 FR 5209, Feb. 9, l 996; 62
FR 629 14, Nov. 25, 1 997; 8 l FR 90659, Dec. l 4, 20 l 6, unless otherwise noted.
AUTHORITY: 1 2 U.S.C. 1 70 l x, 1 70 I x-l ; 42 U . S .C. 3 5 3 5 ( d ) and 5 3 0 1 -5 3 2 0 .
Notes of Decisions ( 2 5 )
Cun·ent through July 9, 2020; 85 FR 4 1 3 1 9.
End n t' Dorn men I ·􀀻 202fl T homs,Hl RcutlT S Nn datm ltl ori􀀼inal U S (Ju, 1:mllll!tll \Yorks
WESlLAW ,;_ , 2 iL' ,) Tl10111 s,.in R ,:.,, rt2rs l\l o clcll'll tn 0 1 1 g i n a l U S Govemn1ent Work 􀌠
§ 570.605 Nation a l Flood I nsura nce Prog ram., 24 C.F.R. § 570.605
---------·- -----
Code of Federal Regulations
Title 24. Housing and Urban Development
Subtitle B. Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban Development
Chapter V. Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and D evelopment, Depattment of
Housing and Urban Development (Refs & Annos)
Subchapter C. Community Facilities
Pait 570. Community Development Block Grants (Refs & Annos)
Subpait K. Other Program Requirements (Refs & Annos)
24 C.F.R. § 570.605
§ 570.605 National Flood Insurance Program.
Currentness
Notwithstanding the date of HUD approval of the rec ipient's application (or, in the case of grants made under subpart D of
this pai1 or HUD-adminis tered smal l cities recipients in Hawai i, the date of submiss ion of the grantee's consolidated p lan,
in accordance with 24 CFR part 9 1 ), section 202(a) of the Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1 973 (42 U.S.C. 4 1 06) and the
regulations in 44 CFR parts 59 through 79 apply to funds provided under this pai1 570.
C redits
[60 FR 1 9 1 7, Jan. 5, 1 995 ; 6 1 FR 1 1 477, March 20, 1 996]
SOURCE: 40 FR 24693 , June 9, 1 975; 50 F R 3 7525 , Sept. 16, 1 985; 50 FR 3 909 I , Sept. 27, 1 985; 53 F R 3 1 239, A ug. 1 7,
1 988; 53 FR 3 443 7, Sept. 6, 1 98 8 ; 53 FR 34456, Sept. 6, 1 988; 53 FR 4022 1 , Oct. 1 4, 1 988; 54 FR 3 1 672, Aug. I , 1 98 9; 55 FR
1 8494, May 2, 1 990; 56 FR 4 I 938, Aug. 26, 1 99 1 ; 56 FR 5 6 I 26, Oct. 3 1 , 1 99 1 ; 5 6 FR 5 6906, Nov. 6, 1 99 1 ; 5 7 FR 2 7 1 1 9 , June
1 7, 1 992; 57 FR 40067, S ept. I, 1 992; 57 FR 5 33 97, Nov. 9, 1 992; 59 FR 66598, Dec. 27, 1 994; 6 1 FR 5209, Feb. 9, 1 996; 62
FR 629 1 4 , Nov. 25, 1 997; 8 1 FR 90659, Dec. 1 4, 20 1 6, un less otherwise noted.
AUTHORITY: 1 2 U . S .C . 1 70 1 x, 1 70 1 x- 1 ; 42 U .S . C . J 5 3 5 (cl ) and 530 1 -5320.
Current through July 9, 2020; 85 F R 4 1 3 1 9.
E n d o r D o r u m e n t ( . 2 1 ) 2 U 􀁇f ho111snn RL'uti:rs No c l a 1 111 ro <1rig111al U S Ci{ln􀁈rnlllt'llt \.\orks
WEST LAW
--·--·- ·- -- --- -----·- · --- ------ ·--------· -- - - --- -----
§ 570.606 Displacement, relocation, a cquisition, and . . . , 24 C .F.R. § 570.606
Code of Federal Regulations
Title 24. H ousing and Urban Development
Subtitle B . Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban Development
Chapter V. Office of Assistant Secretaiy for Community Planning and Development, Depa1tment of
Housing and Urban Development (Refs & Annos)
Subchapter C. Community Facilities
Part 570. Community Development Block Grants (Refs & Annos)
Subpart K. Other Program Requirements (Refs & Annos)
24 C.F.R. § 570 . 606
§ 570.606 Displacement, relocation, acquisition, and replacement of housing.
Currentness
(a) General policy for minimizing displacement. Consistent with the other goals and objectives of this part, grantees (or States
or state recipients, as applicable) shall assure that they have taken all reasonable steps to minimize the displacement of persons
(fami lies, individuals, businesses, nonprofit organizations, and farms) as a result of activities assisted under this pa1t.
(b) Relocation assistance for displaced persons at URA levels.
( I ) A displaced person shall be provided with relocation assistance at the levels described in, and in accordance with the
requirements of 49 CFR part 24, which contains the government-wide regulations implementing the Unifom1 Relocation
Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1 970 (U RA) (42 U .S.C. 460 1 -465 5 ).
(2) Displaced person.
( i ) For purposes of paragraph (b) of this section, the term "displaced person" means any person (family, individual, business,
nonprofit organization, or farm) that moves from real prope1ty, or moves his or her personal property from real property,
permanently and involuntarily, as a direct result o f rehabilitation, demolition, or acquisition for an activity assisted under
this part. A permanent, involuntary move for an assisted activity includes a pemrnnent move from real prope1ty that is made:
(A) After notice by the grantee (or the state recipient, if applicable) to move pernrnnently from the property, if the
move occurs after the initial official submission to HUD (or the State, as applicable) for grant, loan, or loan guarantee
funds under this pa1t that are later provided or granted.
(8) After notice by the property owner to move permanently from the prope1ty, if the move occurs after the date of
the submission of a request for financial assistance by the property owner (or person in control of the s ite) that is
later approved for the requested activity.
WESTLAW 2 0 ;2 () T li o i 1 1 s o 1 1 R s u t a rs No c l a 1 11 1 tu mi•J 1 1 1 .:1 I LI S ( i c, 1,:;mr1 1 e 11 l Worl1 s .
§ 570.606 Displa cement, relocation, acq uisition, a n d . . . , 24 C.F.R. § 570.606
. ------------- -----
(C) Before the date described in paragraph (b)(2)( i )(A) or ( B ) of this section , if either I-I U D or the grantee (or State,
as applicable) determines that the displacement d i rectly resulted from acqu isition, rehabilitation, or demolition for
the requested activity.
( D ) After the "initiation of negotiations" if the person is the tenant-occupan t of a dwelling unit and any one of the
fol lowing three situations occurs:
( I ) The tenant has not been provided with a reasonable opportunity to lease and occupy a suitable decent, safe,
and sanitary dwelling in the same building/complex upon the completion of the project, includ ing a monthly
rent that does not exceed the greater of the tenant's monthly rent and estimated average utility costs before the
initiation of negotiations or 30 percent of the househol d's average monthly gross income; or
(2) The tenant is required to relocate temporarily for the activity but the tenant is not offered payment for al l
reasonable out-of-pocket expenses i ncurred in connection with the temporary relocation, including the cost of
moving to and from the temporary location and any increased housing costs, or other conditions of the temporary
relocation are not reasonable; and the tenant does not return to the building/complex; or
( 3 ) The tenant i s requ i red to move to another unit in the buildi ng/complex, but is not o ffered reimbursement for
all reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with the move.
( i i ) Notwithstanding the provis i ons of paragraph (b)(2)( i ) of this section, the tenn "displaced person-" does not include:
( A ) A person who is evicted for cause based upon serious or repeated violations o f material terms o f the lease
or occupancy agreement. To exclude a person on this basis, the grantee (or State or state recipient, as applicable)
must determine that the eviction was not undertaken for the purpose of evading the obl igation to provide relocation
assistance u nder this section;
( B ) A person who moves into the property after the date o f the notice descri bed i n paragraph (b)(2)( i )( A ) or ( B ) of
this section, but who recei ved a written notice of the expected d isplacement before occupancy.
( C ) A person who is not d isplaced as described in 49 C'FR 24.2(g }( 2 } .
( D ) A person who the grantee (or State, as applicabl e ) dete1111 ines i s not d isplaced a s a direct result of the acquisition,
rehabi litation, or demolition for an assisted activity. To exclude a person on thi s basis, HUD must concur in that
determination.
( i i i ) A grantee (or State or state recipient, as applicable) may, at any time, request HUD to determine whether a person
is a d isp laced person under this section.
( 3 } I n itiation o f negotiations. For purposes of determining the type of replacement hous ing assistance to be provided under
paragraph ( b ) of this section, i f the displacement is the d irect result of privately undertaken rehabilitation, demol ition,
WEST L AW 2
§ 570.606 Displacement, rel ocati o n , a c q u isition, a n d ... , 24 C.F.R. § 570.606
or acquisition of real property, the term "initiation of negotiations" means the execution of the grant or loan agreement
between the grantee (or State or state recipient, as applicable) and the person owning or controll ing the real property.
(c) Residential antidisplacement and relocation assistance plan. The grantee shall comply with the requirements of 24 C FR
pa1i 42, subpart B .
(d) Optional relocation assistance. Under section I 0 5(a)( 1 1 ) o f the Act, the grantee may provide (or the State may permit the
state recipient to p rovide, as applicable) relocation payments and other relocation assistance to persons displaced by activities
that are not subject to paragraph (b) or (c) of this section. The grantee may also provide (or the State may also permit the
state recipient to provide, as applicable) relocation assistance to persons receiving assistance under paragraphs (b) or (c) of this
section at levels in excess of those required by these paragraphs. Unless such assistance is provided under State or local law, the
grantee (or state recipient, as applicable) shall provide such assistance only upon the basis of a written determination that the
assistance is appropriate (see, e.g., 24 CFR 5 70.20 l (i ), as applicable). The grantee (or state recipient, as applicable) must adopt
a written policy available to the public that describes the relocation assistance that the grantee (or state recipient, as applicable)
has elected to provide and that provides for equal relocation assistance within each class o f displaced persons.
(e) Acquisition of real prope1iy. The acquisition of real prope1iy for an assisted activity is subject to 49 CFR pa1i 24, subpa1i B.
( f) Appeals. If a person disagrees with the determination of the grantee (or the state recipient, as applicable) concerning the
person's eligibility for, or the amount of, a relocation payment under this section, the person may file a written appeal of that
determination with the grantee (or state recipient, as applicable). The appeal procedures to be followed are described in 49 CFR
24. 1 0 . In addition, a low- or moderate-income household that has been displaced from a dwelling may file a written request for
review of the grantee's decision to the HUD Field Office. For purposes of the State CDBG program, a low- or moderate-income
household may file a written request for review of the state recipient's decision with the State.
(g) Responsibility of grantee or State.
( I ) The grantee (or State, if applicable) is responsible for ensuring compliance with the requirements of this section,
notwithstanding any third party's contractual obligation to the grantee to comply with the provisions of this section. For
purposes of the State CDBG program, the State shall require state recipients to certify that they will comply with the
requirements of this section.
(2) The cost o f assistance required under this section may be paid from local public funds, funds provided under this part,
or funds available from other sources.
(3) The grantee (or State and state recipient, as applicable) must maintain records in sufficient detail to demonstrate
compliance with the provisions of this section.
(Approved by the Office of l'vlanagement and Budget under 0MB control number 2 506-0 I 02)
- - --- - ---·--· ----- --·---------- ------------------
WESTLAW 1 , 􀄶' 0 2 0 T h ,-,n 1so11 Fi P- u l t'; 1 5 No < . l :1 1 111 to o r 1 􀄷 1 11 a l U c:; Gc 1112 m m e n t Wo r k s
§ 570.606 Displa c e m e n t, rel o c a t i o n , a c q u is it i o n , a nd . . . , 24 C . F. R . § 570.606
Credits
[53 FR 4022 1 , Oct. 1 4, 1 98 8 ; 53 FR 4 1 3 30, Oct. 2 1 , 1 988; 55 FR 293 1 2, July 1 8, 1 990; 56 FR 5 6 1 2 8, Oct. 3 1 , 1 99 1 ; 60 FR
1 9 1 7, Jan. 5, 1 995 ; 60 FR 569 1 6 , Nov. 9, 1 995 ; 6 1 FR 1 1 477, March 20, 1 996; 6 1 F R 5 1 760, Oct. 3 , 1 996]
SOURCE: 40 FR 24693, June 9, 1 975; 50 FR 37525, Sept. 1 6, 1 98 5 ; 50 FR 3909 1 , Sept. 27, 1 985; 53 FR 3 1 239, Aug. 1 7,
1 98 8 ; 53 FR 3 443 7, S ept. 6, I 988; 53 FR 34456, Sept. 6, 1 988; 53 FR 4022 1 , Oct. 1 4, 1 988; 54 FR 3 1 672, Aug. I , 1 989; 55 FR
1 8494, May 2 , 1 990; 56 FR 4 1 93 8 , Aug. 26, 1 99 1 ; 56 F R 56 1 26, Oct. 3 1 , 1 99 1 ; 5 6 FR 56906 , Nov. 6, 1 99 1 ; 5 7 F R 2 7 1 1 9, June
1 7, 1 992; 57 FR 4006 7, Sept. I , 1 992; 57 FR 5 3 3 97, Nov. 9, 1 992; 59 FR 66598, Dec. 27, 1 994; 6 1 FR 5209, Feb. 9, 1 996; 6 2
FR 629 1 4, Nov. 2 5 , 1 997; 8 1 F R 90659, Dec. 1 4, 20 1 6, unless otherwise noted.
AUTHORITY: 1 2 U . S .C. 1 70 l x, 1 70 1 x-1 ; 42 U.S.C. 3 5 3 5 ( d ) and 5 3 0 1 -5320.
Notes of Decisions { 1 2 )
Current through July 9, 2020; 85 FR 4 1 3 1 9 .
E n d ol' Dor11nm11
WES T L AW
§ 570.607 Em ployment and contractin g o pportunities ., 24 C.F.R. § 570.607
Code of Federal Regulations
Title 24. Housing and Urban Development
Subtitle B . Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban Development
Chapter V. Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and Development, Department of
Housing and Urban Development (Refs & Annas)
Subchapter C. Community Facilities
Part 570 . Community Development Block Grants (Refs & An nos)
Subpart K. Other Program Requirements (Refs & Annas)
24 C.F.R. § 570.607
§ 570.607 Employment and contracting opportunities.
Currentness
To the extent that they are otherwise applicable, grantees shall comply with:
(a) Executive Order 1 1 246, as amended by Executive Orders 1 1 375, 1 1 478, 1 2086, and 1 2 1 07 (3 CFR 1 964- 1 965 Comp. p.
339; 3 CFR, 1 966- 1 970 Comp., p. 684; 3 CFR, 1 966- 1 970., p. 803; 3 CFR, 1 978 Comp., p . 230; 3 CFR, 1 97 8 Comp., p. 264
(Equal Employment Oppo1tunity), and Executive Order 1 3279 (Equal Protection of the Laws for Faith-Based and Community
Organizations), 67 FR 77 1 4 1 , 3 CFR, 2002 Comp., p. 2 5 8 ; and the implementing regulations at 4 1 CFR chapter 60; and
(b) Section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1 968 ( 12 U .S.C. 1 70 I u) and implementing regulations at 24 CFR
patt 1 3 5 .
Credits
[59 FR 3 3 894, June 30, 1 994; 6 1 FR 5209, Feb. 9, 1 996; 68 FR 56405 , Sept. 30, 2003)
SOURCE: 40 FR 24693 , June 9, 1 975; 50 FR 37525 , Sept. 1 6, 1 98 5 ; 50 FR 3909 1 , Sept. 27, 1 9 8 5 ; 53 FR 3 1 239, Aug. 1 7,
1 9 8 8 ; 53 FR 3443 7 , Sept. 6, 1 98 8 ; 53 FR 34456, Sept. 6, I 988; 53 FR 4022 1 , Oct. 1 4, 1 988; 54 FR 3 1 672, Aug. I , I 989; 55 FR
1 8494, May 2, 1 990; 56 FR 4 1 938, Aug. 26, 1 99 1 ; 56 FR 5 6 1 26, Oct. 3 1 , 1 99 1 ; 56 FR 56906, Nov. 6, 1 99 1 ; 57 FR 27 1 1 9 , June
1 7, I 992; 57 FR 40067, Sept. I , 1 992; 5 7 FR 53397, Nov. 9, 1 992; 59 FR 66598 , Dec. 27, 1 994; 6 1 FR 5209, Feb. 9, 1 996; 62
FR 629 1 4, Nov. 25, 1 997; 81 FR 90659, Dec. 1 4, 20 1 6, unless otherwise noted.
AUTHOR1TY: 12 U . S . C . 1 70 1 x, 1 70 1 x- 1 ; 42 U .S C . 3 5 3 S ( d ) and 5 30 1 - 5 3 2 0 .
CuITent through July 9 , 2020; 85 FR 4 1 3 1 9.
Entl of Durn m e n l ,.; 2020 Thornsun Reull·r.:; No ch11m l o t1ri􀇤111al U S G11vem111e11l \.\-nrks
WESTLAW " ? : J ,2 1 ) r l 1 t,rns• lll F1-::' rtc,r 􀌡 l\lo da111 1 to r1 1 1 g 1 11 c1 I U S Governn1e11I INor l1 s
§ 570.608 Lead-ba s e d paint. , 24 C .F.R . § 570.608
Code of Federal Regulations
Title 24. Housing and Urban Development
Subtitle B. Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban Development
Chapter V. Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and Development, Depmtment of
Housing and Urban Development (Refs & Annos)
Subchapter C. Community Facilities
Part 570. Community Development Block Grants (Refs & Annas)
Subpatt K. Other Program Requirements (Refs & Annos)
24 C.F.R. § 570 .608
§ 570 .608 Lead-based paint.
Currentness
The Lead-Based Paint Poisoning Prevention Act (42 U.S.C. 482 1 --4846 ), the Residential Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction
Act of 1 992 (42 U .S.C. 485 1 --4856 ), and implementing regulations at part 3 5 , s ubparts A, B, J, K, and R of this pai1 apply to
activities under th is program.
Credits
[53 FR 4 1 33 0 , Oct. 2 1 , 1 988; 6 1 FR 1 1 48 1 , March 20, I 996; 64 FR 50226, Sept. 1 5 , 1 999]
SOURCE: 40 FR 24693 , June 9, 1 97 5 ; 50 FR 3 75 2 5 , Sept. 1 6, 1 9 85; 50 FR 3909 1 , Sept. 2 7, 1 98 5 ; 53 F R 3 1 23 9 , Aug. 1 7,
I 988; 53 FR 3443 7 , Sept. 6, 1 988; 5 3 FR 34456, Sept. 6, 1 98 8 ; 53 FR 4022 1 , Oct. 1 4, 1 988; 5 4 FR 3 1 672, Aug. 1 , 1 989; 55 F R
1 8494, May 2, 1 990; 5 6 FR 4 1 93 8 , Aug. 2 6 , 1 99 1 ; 56 F R 5 6 1 26, Oct. 3 1 , I 99 1 ; 5 6 FR 56906, Nov. 6, 1 99 1 ; 5 7 FR 27 1 1 9 , June
1 7, I 992; 5 7 FR 40067, Sept. I , 1 992; 5 7 F R 5 3 3 97, Nov. 9, 1 992; 59 F R 6 6 5 9 8 , Dec. 27, 1 994; 6 1 F R 5 209, Feb. 9, 1 996; 62
F R 629 1 4, Nov. 2 5 , 1 997; 8 1 F R 90659, Dec. 1 4, 20 1 6 , unless otherwise noted.
AUTHORITY: 12 U .S.C. 1 70 I x , 1 70 I x-1 ; 42 U . S . C. 3 5 3 5 ( d ) and 530 1 -5 3 2 0 .
Notes of Decisions ( 1 2 )
Current through Ju ly 9 , 2020; 8 5 F R 4 1 3 1 9.
End or llo,· 11111rnl
§ 570.609 Use of debarred, s u s pended or i ne l i gible contractors ... , 24 C . F.R. § 570.609
Code of Federal Regulations
Title 24. Housing and Urban Development
Subtitle B. Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban Development
Chapter V. Office of Assistant Secreta1y for Community Planning and Development, Depmtment of
Housing and Urban Development (Refs & Annos)
Subchapter C. Community Facilities
Part 570. Community Development Block Grants (Refs & Annos)
Subpart K. Other Program Requirements (Refs & Annas)
24 C.F.R. § 570.609
§ 570.609 Use of debarred, suspended or ineligible contractors or subrecipients.
Currentness
The requirements set fo rth in 24 C F R pa1t 5 apply to this program.
Credits
[53 FR 4 1 330, Oct. 2 1 , 1 98 8 ; 6 1 FR 5209, Feb. 9, 1 996]
SOURCE: 40 FR 24693 , June 9, 1 975; 50 FR 37525, Sept. 1 6, 1 985; 50 FR 3909 1 , Sept. 27, 1 9 8 5 ; 53 FR 3 1 23 9 , Aug. 1 7,
1 988; 53 FR 3443 7 , Sept. 6, 1 98 8 ; 53 F R 34456, Sept. 6, 1 988; 53 F R 4022 l , Oct. 1 4, 1 988; 54 FR 3 1 672, Aug. l , 1989; 55 FR
1 8494, May 2, 1 990; 56 FR 4 1 93 8 , Aug. 26, 1 99 1 ; 56 FR 5 6 1 26, Oct. 3 1 , 1 99 1 ; 56 FR 56906, Nov. 6, 1 99 1 ; 5 7 FR 27 1 1 9 , June
1 7, 1 992; 57 FR 40067, Sept. I , 1 992; 57 FR 53397, Nov. 9, 1 992; 59 FR 66598, Dec. 27, 1 994; 6 1 FR 5209, Feb. 9, 1 996; 62
FR 629 1 4, Nov. 25, 1 997; 8 1 FR 90659, Dec. 1 4, 20 1 6, unless otherwise noted.
AUTHORITY: 1 2 U .S . C . 1 70 I x, 1 70 1 x-1 ; 42 U . S.C. 3 5 3 5td) and 5 3 0 1 -5320.
Current through J u ly 9, 2020; 8 5 F R 4 1 3 1 9.
End of' Ducu mrnl , _ 211211 Tl111111sun Reuters Nu cl□1111 lu uri􀃎111al l l S Ciu, ernment \l'urks
WEST LAW 2 0 2 0 l"lwrnson R cH t l -3 1'S l\lo c lc1 1 m to ori g i n a l l / S r;o1J ,,mme11 t VVmh s
§ 570.61 0 U n iform a dmin istrative re q u i rements, cost p rinciples, ... , 24 C.F. R . § 570.61 0
Code of Federal Regulations
Title 24. Housi ng and Urb a n Development
Subtitle B. Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban Development
Chapter V. Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning a nd Development, Department of
Housing and Urban Development (Refs & Annos)
Subchapter C. Community Facilities
Part 570. Community Development Block Grants (Refs & Annos)
Subpart K. Other Program Requirements (Refs & Annos)
24 C.F.R. § 570.610
§ 570 .610 Uniform administrative requirements, cost principles, and audit requirements for Federal awards.
Effective : January 6, 2016
Currentness
The recipient, its agencies or i nstrumentalities, and subrecipients s hall comply with 2 CFR part 200, "Uniform Administrative
Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards", as set forth at § 5 70 . 50 2 .
Credits
[53 FR 4 1 3 30 , Oct. 2 1 , I 988; 57 FR 33256, July 27, 1 992; 59 FR 273 8 , Jan. 1 9, 1 994; 60 FR 569 1 6 , Nov. 9, 1 995; 80 FR
7593 8 , Dec. 7, 20 1 5 ]
SOURCE: 40 FR 24693 , June 9, 1 97 5 ; 50 FR 3 7 5 2 5 , Sept. 1 6, 1 98 5 ; 50 FR 3909 1 , Sept. 27, 1 985; 5 3 FR 3 1 239, Aug. 1 7,
1 988; 53 FR 3 443 7, Sept. 6, 1 988; 53 FR 34456, Sept. 6, 1 988; 5 3 FR 4022 I , Oct. 1 4, 1 988; 54 FR 3 1 672, Aug. I , 1 989; 55 FR
1 8494, May 2, 1 990; 56 FR 4 1 93 8 , Aug. 26, 1 99 1 ; 56 FR 56 1 26, Oct. 3 1 , 1 99 1 ; 5 6 FR 5690 6 , Nov. 6, 1 99 1 ; 57 FR 27 1 1 9, June
1 7, 1 992; 5 7 FR 40067, Sept. I , 1 992; 5 7 FR 5 3 3 97, Nov. 9, 1 992; 59 FR 665 9 8 , Dec. 27, 1 994; 6 1 FR 5209, Feb. 9, 1 996; 62
FR 629 1 4, Nov. 25, 1 997; 8 1 FR 90659, Dec. 1 4, 20 1 6, unless otherwise noted.
AUTHORJTY: 1 2 U .S.C. 1 70 I x, 1 70 I x-1 ; 42 U .S.C. 3 5 3 5 ( d ) and 530 1 -5 3 2 0 .
Current through J u l y 9 , 2020; 85 FR 4 1 3 1 9.
E nt! or Dol'l1111 r11t c 20211 l"hnmsnn H. ....· t1ters No cln1 111 to 01 ig1 11nl U S Gc 1 , crnm1:.•nt \\ ork:')
WEST AW
§ 570.61 1 C o nflict of interest., 24 C . F.R. § 570. 6 1 1
Code o f Federal Regulations
Title 24. Housing and Urban Development
Subtitle B. Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban Development
Chapter V. Office of Assistant Secretaiy for Community Planning and Development, Department o f
Housing a n d Urban Development (Refs & Annos)
Subchapter C. Community Facilities
Part 570. Community D evelopment Block Grants (Refs & Annos)
Subpart K. Other Program Requirements (Refs & Annos)
(a) Applicabil ity.
24 C.F.R. § 570.611
§ 570.611 Conflict of interest.
Effective: January 6, 2016
Currentness
( I ) In the procurement of supplies, equipment, construction, and services by recipients and by subrecipients, the conflict
of interest provisions in 2 CFR 200.3 1 7 and 200.3 1 8 , shall apply.
(2) In all cases not governed by 2 CFR 200 .3 1 7 and 200 .3 1 8 , the provisions of this section shall apply. Such cases include
the acquisition and disposition o f real property and the provision of assistance by the recipient or by its subrecipients to
individuals, businesses, and other private entities under eligible activities that authorize such assistance (e.g., rehabilitation,
preservation, and other improvements of private prope1ties or facilities pursuant to § 570.202; or grants, loans, and other
assistance to businesses, individuals, and other private entities pursuant to § 570 .203 , 5 70 .204, 5 70.45 5 , or 5 70 .703( i ) ).
(b) Conflicts prohibited. The general rule is that no persons described in paragraph (c) of this section who exercise or have
exercised any functions or responsibilities with respect to COBO activities assisted under this part, or who are in a position to
pmticipate in a decisionmaking process or gain inside information with regard to such activities, may obtain a financial interest
or benefit from a COBO-assisted activity, or have a financial interest in any contract, subcontract, or agreement with respect
to a C OBO-assisted activity, or with respect to the proceeds of the CO BG-assisted activity, either for themselves or those with
whom they have business or immed iate family ties, during their tenure or for one year thereafter. For the UDAO program , the
above restrictions shall apply to all activities that are a part o f the UOAG project, and shall cover any such financial interest
or benefit during, or at any time after, such person's tenure.
(c) Persons covered. The conflict of interest provisions of paragraph (b) of this section apply to any person who is an employee,
agent, consultant, officer, or elected official or appointed official of the recipient, or of any designated public agencies, or of
subrecipients that are receiving funds under this pa1t.
(d) Exceptions. Upon the written request of the recipient, HUD may grant an exception to the provisions of paragraph (b) of
th is section on a case-by-case basis when it has satisfactorily met the threshold requirements of (d)( I ) of this section, taking
into account the cnmulative effects o f paragraph (d)(2) o f this section.
WESTLAW ,,'. 2 0 2 0 Thom s o 1 1 R e u t ers f\lo L. la1111 to o ri g i n a l U S Government Wu r k s
§ 570.6 1 1 Confl ict of i nterest., 24 C.F.R. § 570. 6 1 1
( I ) Threshold requirements. H U D w i l l consider a n exception only after the recipient has provided the following
documentation:
( i ) A disclosure of the nature of the conflict, accompanied by an assurance that there has been public disclosure of the
conflict and a description of how the public d isclosure was made; and
( i i ) An opi nion of the recipient's attorney that the interest for which the exception is sought would not violate State or
local law.
(2) Factors to be considered for exceptions. In determ i ning whether to grant a requested exception after the recipient has
satisfactorily met the req u i rements of paragraph (d)( I ) of this section, HUD shall conclude that such an exception will
serve to further the purposes of the Act and the effective and efficient administration of the recipient's program or project,
taking into account the cumulative effect of the following factors, as applicable :
( i ) Whether the exception would provide a s ignificant cost benefit o r a n essential degree of expe11ise to the program or
proj ect that would otherwise not be available;
( ii) Whether an opportunity was provided for open competitive b idding or negotiation;
( i i i ) W hether the person affected is a member of a group or c lass of low- or moderate-income persons intended to be the
beneficiaries of the assisted activity, and the exception will permit such person to receive generally the same interests or
benefits as are being made avai lable or provided to the group or class;
( iv) W hether the affected person has withdrawn from his or her functions or responsibilities, or the decisionmaking process
with respect to the speci fie assisted activity in question;
(v) Whether the i nterest or benefit was present before the affected person was in a position as described in paragraph (b)
of this section;
(vi) Whether undue hardship will result either to the recipient or the person affected when weighed against the publ ic
interest served by avoidi ng the prohibited confl ict; and
(vii) Any other relevant considerations.
Credits
(53 FR 4 1 3 3 0 , Oct. 2 1 , 1 988; 57 FR 2 7 1 20, June 1 7, 1 992; 60 FR 569 1 6 , Nov. 9, 1 99 5 ; 80 FR 75938, Dec. 7, 20 1 5]
SOURCE: 40 FR 24693, June 9, 1 975; 50 F R 3 75 2 5 , Sept. 1 6, 1 9 8 5 ; 5 0 F R 3909 1 , Sept. 27, 1 98 5 ; 53 FR 3 1 239, Aug. 1 7,
1 988; 53 FR 3 443 7 , Sept. 6, 1 988; 5 3 FR 3 4456, Sept. 6, 1 988; 5 3 FR 4022 1 , Oct. 1 4, 1 98 8 ; 54 FR 3 1 672, Aug. I , I 989; 55 FR
1 8494, May 2, 1 990; 5 6 FR 4 1 93 8, Aug. 26, 1 99 1 ; 56 F R 5 6 1 26 , Oct. 3 1 , 1 99 1 ; 56 F R 56906, Nov. 6, 1 99 1 ; 5 7 F R 27 1 1 9, June
WESTLAW
§ 570.611 C onfl ict of i n terest., 24 C . F.R. § 570. 6 1 1
1 7, 1 992; 5 7 F R 40067, Sept. I , 1 992; 5 7 F R 53 397, Nov. 9 , 1 992; 5 9 FR 66598, Dec. 2 7 , 1994; 6 1 FR 5209, Feb. 9 , 1 996; 6 2
F R 629 1 4, Nov. 2 5 , 1 997; 8 1 FR 90659, Dec. 1 4, 20 1 6, u nless otherwise noted.
AUTHORITY: 1 2 U S.C 1 70 I x, 1 70 I x-1 ; 42 U .S.C. 3 5 3 5 (d) and 530 1 -5320.
Notes of Decisions ( I )
Current through July 9, 2020; 8 5 F R 4 1 3 1 9.
E n d of DornnH, 1 1 1 ( • 2020 Thumsnn Reuters No cl.11111 to original l I S (iovernmc11t \\"orks
WESTLAW .;_ , 2 020 Th,1 1 1 1 ·,;,11 , l < e ut 2 1 s No c l a 1 n i to o ri 9 1 1 1 a l U S . Gover r t m e n t Wrnk .:a
§ 570.6 1 2 Executive Order 1 2372., 24 C.F.R. § 570.61 2
Code of Federal Regulations
Title 24. Housing and Urban Development
Subtitle B. Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban Development
Chapter V. Office of Assistant Secreta1y for Community Planning and Development, Department of
Housing and Urban Development ( Refs & Annos)
Subchapter C. Community Facilities
Part 570 . Community Development Block Grants (Refs & Annas)
Subpart K. Other Program Requirements ( Refs & Annos)
24 C.F.R. § 570.612
§ 570 .612 Executive Order 12372.
Currentness
(a) Genera l . Executive Orde1· 1 23 72, Intergovernmental Review of Federal Programs, and the Department's implementing
regulations at 24 CFR paii 52, al low each State to establish its own process for review and comment on proposed Federal
financial assistance programs.
(b) Applicabil ity. Executive Order 1 23 72 applies to the CDBG Entitlement program and the UDAG program . The Executive
Order applies to all activities proposed to be assisted under UDAG, but it applies to the Entitlement program only where a
grantee proposes to use funds for the p lanning or construction (reconstruction or installation ) of water or sewer fac i lities. Such
facil ities include storm sewers as well as all sanitary sewers, but do not include water and sewer l ines connecting a structure
to the l ines in the public right-of-way or easement. It is the responsibility of the grantee to initiate the Executive Order review
process if it proposes to use its CDBG or UDAG funds for activities subject to review.
SOURCE: 40 FR 24693 , June 9, 1 975; 50 F R 375 2 5 , Sept. 1 6, 1 985; 50 F R 3909 1 , Sept. 27, 1 985; 53 FR 3 I 239, Aug. 1 7,
1 98 8 ; 5 3 F R 34437, Sept. 6, 1 98 8 ; 53 F R 34456, Sept. 6, 1 988; 53 F R 402 2 1 , Oct. 14, 1 988; 54 F R 3 1 672, Aug. I, 1 989; 55 FR
I 8494, May 2, 1990; 56 F R 4 I 938, Aug. 26, 1 99 1 ; 56 FR 5 6 1 26, Oct. 3 1 , 1 99 1 ; 5 6 FR 56906, Nov. 6, 1 99 1 ; 5 7 FR 27 1 1 9 , June
1 7, 1 992; 57 FR 40067, Sept. I , 1 992; 5 7 FR 5 3 3 97, Nov. 9, 1 992; 59 FR 66598, Dec. 27, 1 994; 6 I FR 5209, Feb. 9, 1 996; 62
FR 629 1 4, Nov. 25, 1 99 7 ; 8 1 FR 90659, Dec. 1 4, 20 I 6, u n less otherwise noted.
AUTHORITY: 12 U .S C . 1 70 I x, I 70 I x -1 ; 42 U . S . C . J 5 3 5 ( d ) and 530 1 -5 3 2 0 .
Current through J u l y 9 , 2020; 8 5 FR 4 I 3 I 9.
E n 􀇥 or llornme n l
WESTLAW
§ 570.61 3 Eligibility restrictions fo r certain resident aliens., 24 C.F.R. § 570.6 1 3
Code o f Federal Regulations
Title 24. Housing and Urban Development
Subtitle B . Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban Development
Chapter V. Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and Development, Depaitment of
Housing and Urban Development (Refs & Annas)
Subchapter C. Community Facilities
Part 570. Community Development Block Grants (Refs & Annas)
Subpart K. Other Program Requirements (Refs & Annas)
24 C.F.R. § 570.613
§ 570.613 Eligibility restrictions for ce1tain resident aliens.
Currentness
(a) Restriction. Certain newly legalized aliens, as described in 24 CFR part 49, are not eligible to apply for benefits under
covered activities funded by the programs listed in paragraph (e) of this section. "Benefits" under this section means financial
assistance, public services, jobs and access to new or rehabilitated housing and other facilities made available under covered
activities funded by programs listed in paragraph (e) of this section. "Benefits" do not include relocation services and payments
to which displacees are entitled by law.
(b) Covered activities. "Covered activities" under this section means activities meeting the requirements of § 570.208(a) that
either:
( I ) Have income eligibility requirements l im iting the benefits exclusively to low and moderate income persons; or
(2) Are targeted geographically or otherwise to primarily benefit low and moderate income persons (excluding activities
serving the public at large, such as sewers, roads, sidewalks, and parks), and that provide benefits to persons on the basis
of an application.
(c) Limitation on coverage. The restrictions under this section apply only to applicants for new benefits not being received by
covered resident al iens as of the effective date of this section .
(d) Compliance. Compl iance can be accom plished by obtaining certification as provided in 24 CFR 49.20.
(e) Programs affected.
( I ) The Comm unity Development Block Grant program for small cities, administered under subpart F of part 570 of this
title until closeout of the recipient's grant.
---··-·-·------------ -------------------------------
WESTLAW 2 0 2 0 T lio1 n;;o1 1 Reu ters No cla 1111 to O l'lfJ l n,11 lJ S G{ J'F:,mi n ,􀒇nt Wo rk s
§ 570.61 3 E l i g i b i l ity restrictions for certain resident a l i e n s . , 24 C . F.R. § 570.61 3
( 2 ) The Community Development Block Grant program for entitlement grants, administered under subpart D o f part 5 70
of this title.
(3 ) The Community Development Block Grant program for States, administered u nder subpart I of part 5 70 of this title
until c loseout of the unit of general local government's grant by the State.
(4) The Urban Development Action Grants program , adm inistered under subpatt G of putt 5 70 of this title until closeout
of the recipient's grant.
Credits
[55 FR 1 8494, l'vlay 2, 1 990]
SOURCE: 40 FR 24693 , June 9, 1 97 5 ; 50 FR 3 75 2 5 , Sept. 1 6, 1 985; 50 FR 3909 1 , Sept. 27, 1 98 5 ; 53 FR 3 1 23 9 , Aug. 1 7,
1 988; 5 3 FR 3 443 7, Sept. 6 , 1 988; 53 FR 3445 6, Sept. 6 , 1 988; 5 3 F R 4022 1 , Oct. 1 4, 1 988; 54 FR 3 1 672, Aug. I , 1 989; 55 FR
1 8494, May 2, I 990; 56 FR 4 1 93 8 , A ug. 26, 1 99 1 ; 5 6 F R 5 6 L 26 , Oct. 3 1 , 1 99 1 ; 5 6 F R 5 6906 , Nov. 6, 1 99 1 ; 5 7 F R 2 7 1 1 9 , June
1 7, 1 992; 5 7 F R 40067, S ept. I , 1 992; 57 FR 5 3397, Nov. 9, 1 992; 5 9 F R 66598, Dec. 27, 1 994; 61 FR 5209, Feb. 9, 1 996; 62
FR 629 1 4 , Nov. 25, 1 997; 81 F R 9065 9 , Dec. 1 4, 20 1 6, unless otherwise noted .
A UTHORITY: 1 2 U .S.C. 1 70 I x , 1 70 I x-1 ; 42 U . S .C. 3 5 3 5 ( d ) and 530 1 - 5 3 20 .
Cu1Tent through July 9, 2020; 8 5 F R 4 1 J 1 9.
E n d or 1 J o cu m r 1 1 1 l 􀃈 2020 Thnmson R1::utL·rs Nn dn1m to onginul U S CiDH.'l'lll1 1t.'11l \\ urks
WESTLAW r , 2 0 2 0 T l 1 1_,1 , 1 s,:;11 R f:1 1 l ,w; 􀄝I< , c l a w1 1 t,-1 ornA 1 r1cil l J S C ov21 1 1n 1 e n l W ; ·'. '> 2
§ 570.6 1 4 Arc h itectural Ba rriers Act and the Americans with ... , 24 C.F.R. § 570.614
Code of Federal Regulations
Title 24, H ousing and Urban Development
Subtitle B. Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban Development
Chapter V. Office of Assistant Secretaty for Community Planning and Development, Department of
Housing and Urban Development (Refs & Annos)
Subchapter C. Community Facilities
Part 570. Community Development Block Grants (Refs & Annos)
Subpa1t K. Other Program Requirements ( Refs & Annos)
24 C.F.R. § 570.614
§ 570 .614 Architectural Barriers Act and the Americans with Disabilities Act.
Currentness
(a) The Architectural Barriers Act of 1 968 (42 U.S.C. 4 1 5 1 -4 1 5 7 ) requires certain Federal and Federal ly funded buildings
and other facilities to be designed, constructed, or altered in accordance with standards that insure accessibility to, and use by,
physically handicapped people. A building or facility designed, constructed, or altered with funds allocated or reallocated under
this pai1 after December 1 1 , 1 995, and that meets the definition of "residential structure" as defined in 24 CFR 40.2 or the
definition of"building" as defined in 4 1 CFR I O 1-19.602(a) is subject to the requirements of the Architectural B arriers Act of
1 96 8 (42 U.S.C. 4 1 5 1 -4 1 5 7 ) and shall comply with the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards (appendix A to 24 CFR pai1
40 for residential structures, and appendix A to 4 1 CFR part 1 0 1- 1 9, subpart 1 0 1-1 9.6, for general type buildings).
(b) The Americans with Disabilities Act (42 U.S.C. 1 2 1 3 1 ; 47 U .S.C. I 5 5 , 20 I , 2 1 8 and 225) (ADA) provides comprehensive
civil rights to individuals with disabilities in the areas of employment, public accommodations, State and local government
services, and telecommunications. It further provides that discrimination includes a failure to design and construct facilities
for first occupancy no later than January 26, 1 993, that are readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities.
F ut1her, the ADA requires the removal of architectural barriers and communication ba1Tiers that are structural in nature in
existing facilities, where such removal is readily achievable--that is, easily accomplishable and able to be carried out without
much difficulty or expense.
Credits
[60 FR 569 1 7 , Nov. 9, 1 995]
SOURCE: 40 FR 24693 , June 9, 1 97 5 ; 5 0 FR 37525, Sept. 1 6, 1 98 5 ; 50 F R 3909 1 , Sept. 27, 1 98 5 ; 53 FR 3 1 23 9 , Aug. 1 7,
1 98 8 ; 53 FR 3443 7 , Sept. 6, 1 988; 53 FR 34456, Sept. 6, 1 9 8 8 ; 53 FR 4022 1 , Oct. 1 4, 1 98 8 ; 54 FR 3 1 672, Aug. I , 1 989; 5 5 FR
1 8494, May 2, 1 990; 56 FR 4 1 93 8 , Aug. 26, 1 99 1 ; 56 FR 56 1 26 , Oct. 3 1 , 1 99 1 ; 56 FR 56906, Nov. 6, 1 99 1 ; 5 7 FR 27 1 1 9 , June
1 7, l 992; 57 FR 40067, Sept. I , 1 992; 5 7 FR 53397, Nov. 9, 1 992; 59 FR 66598 , Dec. 27, 1 994; 6 1 FR 5209, Feb. 9, 1 996; 62
FR 629 1 4 , Nov. 2 5 , 1 997; 8 1 F R 9065 9, Dec. 1 4, 2016, unless otherwise noted.
AUTHORITY: 1 2 U .S .C . I 70 1 x, 1 70 1 x- 1 ; 42 U .S . C . 3 5 3 5 ( d ) and 5 3 0 1 -5320.
Current through July 9, 2020; 85 FR 4 1 3 1 9 .
WESTL.AW 1' J 2020 Thornso11 R 􀒈,uters No clallll to m1 g 1 n c:1 I LJ S Goven1i11 9 11t Work s
§ 5 7 0 . 6 1 4 Arch itectural Barriers Act a n d the Americans with . . . , 24 C.F.R. § 5 7 0 . 6 1 4
E n d o f D o n1 1 1 H • 1 1 1 \ 21 1211 Th11111snn R􀀻utcrs Nu l'l a1111 tu ongin􀀼1I I J S (il)\"Crn1111.:nt \\'urks
2
§ 570.6 1 5 Housing counseling., 24 C .F.R. § 570.615
Code of Federal Regulations
Title 24. H ousing and Urban Development
Subtitle B . Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban Development
Chapter V. Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and Development, Department of
Housing and Urban Development (Refs & Annas)
Sunchapter C. Community Facilities
P a rt 570. Community Development Block Grants (Refs & Annas)
Subpart K. Other Program Requirements ( Refs & Annas)
24 C.F.R. § 570.615
§ 570.615 Housing counseling.
Effective: January 13, 2017
Currentness
Housing counsel i ng, as defined in 24 CFR 5 . 1 00 , that is funded with or provided in connection with CDBG funds must be
carried out in accordance with 24 CFR 5 . 1 1 1 .
Credits
[8 1 FR 90659, Dec. 1 4, 20 1 6]
SOURCE: 40 FR 24693, June 9, 1 975; 5 0 FR 3 75 2 5 , Sept. 1 6, 1 98 5 ; 5 0 FR 3909 1 , Sept. 27, 1 98 5 ; 53 FR 3 1 23 9 , Aug. 1 7,
1 98 8 ; 53 FR 3443 7, Sept. 6, 1 98 8 ; 5 3 FR 3445 6, Sept. 6, 1 988; 5 3 FR 4022 1 , Oct. 1 4, 1 988; 54 FR 3 1 672, Aug. I , 1 989; 5 5 FR
1 8494, May 2, 1 990; 56 FR 4 1 93 8 , Aug. 26, 1 99 1 ; 56 FR 56 1 26 , Oct. 3 1 , 1 99 1 ; 56 F R 5 6906, Nov. 6, 1 99 1 ; 5 7 FR 2 7 1 1 9, June
1 7, 1 992; 57 FR 40067, Sept. l , l 992; 5 7 FR 5 3397, Nov. 9, l 992; 59 FR 66598, Dec. 27, 1 994; 6 1 FR 5209, Feb. 9, 1 996; 62
FR 629 1 4 , Nov. 25, I 997; 8 I FR 90659, Dec. 1 4, 20 I 6, unless otherwise noted.
AUTHORITY: 1 2 U.S.C. 1 70 I x , 1 70 I x-1 ; 42 U . S .C. 3 53 5 ( d ) and 5 3 0 1 -5 3 2 0 .
CuJTent through July 9 , 2020; 8 5 F R 4 1 3 1 9.
E n d ol' Oommen I •<: 2112(1 ll,nmsun Reuters Nn cln1111 h> uri􀇦inQI U S C iu1·ernmcnt Wurk,
WESTLAW · , 2 0 2 0 Thom son R c u t ,:1 rs N o c l a 1 1 1 1 to 0 1 1 g 1 n .,1 l IJ S G rJ11 e r n rn e n t Wm􀇧 s
§ 200.338 Remed ies for noncompliance., 2 C.F.R. § 200.338
------------ ----- ---------- ·-- --------- -----
KeyCite Yellow Flag - Negative Treatment
Proposed Regulation
Code of Federal Regulations
Attachm ent 5
Title 2. Grants and Agreement'> (Refs & Annos)
Subtitle A. Office of Management and B udget Guidance for Grants and Agreements (Refs & Annos)
Chapter II. Office of M a n agement a n d Budget Guidance (Refs & Annos)
Part 200 . Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal
Awards (Refs & Annos)
Subpart D. Post Federal' Award Requirements
Remedies for Noncompliance
2 C.F.R. § 200.338
§ 200 .338 Remedies for noncompliance.
Effective: December 26, 2013
Currentness
ff a non-Federal entity fails to comply with Federal statutes, regulations or the terms and conditions of a Federal award, the
Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity may impose additional conditions, as described in § 200.207 Specific conditions.
If the Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity determines that noncompl i ance cannot be remedied by imposing additional
conditions, the Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity may take one or more of the following actions, as appropriate
in the c ircumstances:
(a) Temporarily withhold cash payments pend ing correction of the deficiency by the non-Federal entity or more severe
enforcement action by the Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity.
(b) Disallow (that is, deny both use of funds and any applicable matching credit for) all or part of the cost of the activity or
action not in compliance.
( c ) Wholly or pa11ly suspend or terminate the Federal award.
(d ) I n itiate suspension or debarment proceedings as authorized under 2 CFR part 1 80 and Federal awarding agency regulations
(or i n the case of a pass-through entity, recommend such a proceeding be i n itiated by a Federal awarding agency) .
(e) Withhold further F ederal awards for the project o r program.
( f) Take other remedies that may be legally available.
SOURCE: 69 FR 26280, May 1 1 , 2004; 78 FR 78608, Dec. 26, 20 1 3 , un less otherwise noted.
··----------------
WESTLAW
§ 200. 3 38 Remed ies for noncompliance., 2 C.F. R . § 200.338
AUTHORITY: 3 1 U . S.C. 503
Current through July 9, 2020; 8 5 FR 4 1 3 1 9.
1::n<I of IJ ornmcnl '.( 2020 Thomson Rcu\􀅊rs No claim 10 orig111al LI S Gol'ernme111 Works
WESTLAW .􀄸1 2 020 T '1 01 1 1 s , 1n R 2 1 1 t a r s f\1,l c l ::1 1 rn t,_1 01 1q in a l U S C o v 8 rn n i e 11 t Works 2
§ 200.3 3 9 Term ination . , 2 C . F. R . § 200.339
KeyCite Yel low Flag - Negative Treatment
Proposed Reguliltion
Code of Federal Regulations
Title 2 . Grants and Agreements (Refs & Annas)
Subtitle A. Office of M a n agement and Budget Guidance for Grants and Agreements (Refs & Annas)
Chapter I I . Office of Management and Budget Guidance (Refs & Annas)
Part 200. Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost P1inciples, and Audit Requirements for Federal
Awards (Refs & Annas)
Subpart D. Post Federal Award Requirements
Remedies for Noncompliance
2 C.F.R. § 200 .339
§ 200.339 Termination.
Effective: July 30, 2015
Currentness
(a) The Federal award may be term inated in whole or in part as fol lows:
( I ) By the Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity, if a non-Federal entity fails to comply with the terms and
conditions of a Federal award;
(2) By the Federal award ing agency or pass-through entity for cause;
(3 ) By the Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity with the consent of the non-Federal entity, in which case the
two parties m ust agree upon the tennination conditions, including the e ffective date and, in the case of partial tenn ination,
the portion to be te1111inated; or
(4) By the non-Federal entity upon sending to the Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity written notification
setting fotth the reasons for such termination, the effective date, and, in the case of pattial term ination, the po1tion to be
terminated. However, if the Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity determines in the case of paitial termination
that the reduced or mod ified portion of the Federal award or subaward will not accomplish the purposes for which the
Federal award was made, the Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity may terminate the Federal award in its
entirety.
(b) When a Federal awarding agency terminates a Federal award prior to the end of the period of performance due to the nonFederal
entity's material fai lure to comply with the Federal award tem1s and conditions, the Federal award ing agency must
report the termination to the OMS-designated integrity and performance system accessible through SAM (currently FAPfIS).
( I ) The information required under paragraph (b) of this section is not to be repo1ted to designated integrity and performance
system until the non-Federal entity either§
200.339 Te rmination., 2 C . F.R. § 200.339
( i ) Has exhausted its opportunities to object or challenge the decision, see § 200.34 1 Opportunities to object, hearings
and appeals; o r
( i i ) Has not, within 3 0 calendar days after being notified of the term ination, informed the Federal awarding agency that it
intends to appeal the Federal awarding agency's decision to term inate.
( 2 ) If a Federal awarding agency, after entering information into the designated integrity and perfonnance system about
a termination, subsequently:
( i ) Learns that any o f that information is erroneous, the Federal awarding agency must correct the information in the system
within three business days;
( i i ) Obtains an update to that infonnation that could be helpful to other Federal awarding agencies, the Federal awarding
agency is strongly encouraged to amend the information in the system to incorporate the update in a timely way.
( 3 ) Federal awarding agencies, shall not post any information that will be made publicly available in the non-public
segment o f designated integrity and performance system that is covered by a disclosure exemption under the Freedom of
Information Act. lf the non-Federal entity asserts within seven calendar days to the Federal awarding agency who posted
the information, that some of the information made publicly available is covered by a disclosure exemption under the
Freedom of Infomrntion Act, the Federal awarding agency who posted the information must remove the posting within
seven calendar days o f receiving the asse1tion. Prior to reposting the releasable information, the Federal agency must
resolve the issue i n accordance with the agency's Freedom of Information Act procedures.
(c) When a Federal award is tenninated or partially terminated, both the Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity and the
non-Federal entity remain responsible for compliance with the requirements i n § § 200 .343 Closeout and 200.344 Post-closeout
adj ustments and continuing responsibilities.
Credits
[80 FR 43309, July 22, 20 I 5; 80 FR 4 5 3 9 5 , July 30, 20 1 5]
SOURCE: 69 F R 26280, May 1 1 , 2004; Section also affected by : 69 FR 26280, May 1 1 , 2004; 78 FR 78608, Dec. 26, 20 I 3 ;
Section also affected b y : 7 8 F R 78608, Dec. 2 6 , 20 1 3, unless otherwise noted.
A UTHORITY: 3 1 U.S.C. 503
Current through July 30, 2020, 85 FR 45808.
E n <l o f 1 J o rn 1111·11t 􀁯 2. 1 1 􀁰 1 1 Thomson Reuters No dLHlll to rn 1g1nal IJ S Govcrnml'lll \\-\)rks
---------------------------------·---------------
WESTLAW r , .? O ? ll Thom ,nn n t::: u t ,,,rs f\lo cl;i 1 111 to orr g 1 n c1 l l l S GovH1in h:: n t \J\/o , k 􀃶 2