STANDARD AGREEMENT FOR PROFESSIONAL SERVICES 
BETWEEN THE CITY OF LA MESA AND HOME START, INC. FOR ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES FOR THE LA MESA RENTAL ASSISTANCE GRANT PROGRAM 
This Agreement is entered into by City of La Mesa as ofthis].day of )RJer\.A,(, 2020, by and between the City of La Mesa, a municipal corporation, hereinafter referred to as "the City", and Home Start, Inc., hereinafter referred to as "Contractor." 
WITNESSETH THAT: 
WHEREAS, the City has adopted Resolution No. 2020-083; 
WHEREAS, the City has need for professional services for Contractor to perform administrative services for the La Mesa Rental Assistance Grant Program and is willing to compensate Contractor for such services; 
WHEREAS, the City desires to engage Contractor to render certain technical and professional services in the providing of said professional services; and 
WHEREAS, Contractor is qualified to provide said professional services for administration of the La Mesa Rental Assistance Grant Program; 
NOW THEREFORE, the parties do mutually agree as follows: 
SECTION 1: ENGAGEMENT OF CONTRACTOR 
The City hereby agrees to engage Contractor and Contractor hereby agrees to perform the services set forth in this Agreement. The term of the Agreement shall be for a period of twelve 
(12) months subsequent to the date of execution of this Agreement. The Agreement may be renewed for an additional six (6) month term by mutual written consent of both parties. The City Manager shall have sole and exclusive right to exercise any options contained in this Agreement on behalf of the City. 
SECTION 2: SERVICES TO BE PERFORMED BY CONTRACTOR 
Contractor shall commence performance of the Project upon execution of this Agreement by both parties. The term "Project" as used in this Agreement shall include all of the tasks and items listed and described in Exhibit "A" -Scope of Services, attached hereto and incorporated herein as part of this Agreement. 
SECTION 3: KEY PROJECT PERSONNEL 
Contractor agrees to provide the services of Home Start, Inc. staff employed and located at 5005 Texas Street, Suite 203, San Diego, CA 92108. This location shall serve as Contractor's main San Diego Office for the full term of this Agreement. The City reserves the right to request specific qualifications for key personnel under this section. 
I 


SECTION 4: CONTRACTORS Contractor will utilize the services of the following subcontractors during the course of this study: None 
Payment for such services shall be the responsibility of the Contractor. No substitution of proposed subcontractors shall be made without prior written approval by the City. 
SECTION 5: CITY REPRESENTATION 
Carlo Tomaino, Assistant City Manager in the City Manager's Office for the City of La Mesa, or its designated representative, shall represent the City in all matters pertaining to the services rendered pursuant to this Agreement and shall administer said Agreement on behalf of the City. This person shall hereinafter be referred to as the "City's Representative." 
SECTION 6: RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE CITY 
The City will provide the Contractor, or cause to be provided with, the following documents and services at no charge to the Contractor. 
A. Any and all known documents and files containing all necessary information pertaining to the La Mesa Rental Assistance Grant Program for the purpose of assisting Contractor in the performance of all tasks and items listed and described in Exhibit "A" -Scope of Services attached hereto and incorporated herein as part of this Agreement. 
SECTION 7: PERFORMANCE SCHEDULE 
Both Contractor and the City recognize that time is of the essence in the completion of this work. Accordingly, the Contractor shall complete all of the work outlined in Exhibit "A" and described in this Agreement in accordance with the Scope of Services set forth in Exhibit "A" attached hereto and incorporated herein as part of this Agreement. 
The Contractor shall not be responsible for damages or be in default or deemed to be in default by reason of strikes, lockouts, accidents, or acts of God, or failure of City to furnish timely information or to approve or disapprove Contractor's work promptly, or delay or faulty performance by City, or governmental agencies. 
In the event of a conflict between this Agreement and any documents incorporated by reference in this Agreement, the terms and conditions of this Agreement shall supersede those contained in any such document incorporated by reference. 
SECTION 8: COMPENSATION TO CONTRACTOR 
City shall compensate Contractor in the amount of Seventy Five Thousand Dollars and Zero 

Cents ($75,000.00) for the services performed as outlined in Exhibit "B" -Cost Proposal attached hereto and incorporated herein as part of this Agreement. 
SECTION 9: RECORDS 
Contractor shall maintain adequate records to permit inspection audit of Contractor's time-and-material charges under this Agreement. Contractor shall make such records available to the City and to other public agencies responsible for approval, funding or auditing the project, during normal business hours upon reasonable notice. Nothing herein shall convert such records into public records and they will be available only to the City or to public agencies involved with approval, funding or audit functions. Such records shall be maintained by the Contractor for three (3) years following completion of the work under this Agreement. 
SECTION 10: METHOD OF COMPENSATION 
The City shall compensate Contractor for the services performed hereunder within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of Contractor's invoice for the services performed. The Contractor shall provide documentation on said invoice regarding time, materials, and labor that is sufficient to meet normal auditing practice. 
The City shall promptly review invoicing and notify Contractor of any objection thereto in writing within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the invoice; absent such objection the invoice shall be deemed proper and acceptable. 
In the event that any undisputed invoice is not paid within thirty (30) calendar days after receipt of the invoice by the City, it shall commence bearing interest on the date that the invoice was rendered at the rate of 1 % per month and the City agrees to pay all accrued interest, together with the charges for services rendered. 

SECTION 11: ITEMS TO BE DELIVERED TO CITY 
The items to be delivered by the Contractor to the City are as described in Exhibit "A" -Scope of Services attached hereto and incorporated herein as part of the Agreement. 
SECTION 12: DESIGN CHANGES OR REVISIONS 
No design changes or revisions will be required and no payment therefor will be made except pursuant to the provisions of this Agreement. No extra compensation shall be paid the Contractor for revisions required by reason of omissions or errors by the Contractor in the preparation of the original document, plans, working drawings, or specifications. Changes to the scope of this Agreement shall be negotiated prior to commencement of extra work. 
SECTION 13: HOLD HARMLESS 

To the furthest extent allowed by law, Contractor shall indemnify, hold harmless and defend City and each of its elected officials, officers, officials, employees, agents and volunteers from any and all loss, liability, fines, penalties, forfeitures, costs and damages (whether in contract, tort or strict liability, including but not limited to personal injury, death at any time and property damage), incurred by City, Contractor or any other person, and from any and all claims, 

demands and actions in law or equity (including reasonable attorney's fees and litigation expenses), arising or alleged to have arisen directly or indirectly out of performance of this Contract. Contractor's obligations under the preceding sentence shall apply regardless of whether City or any of its elected officials, officers, officials, employees, agents or volunteers are passively negligent, but shall not apply to any loss, liability, fines, penalties, forfeitures, costs or damages caused by the active or sole negligence, or the willful misconduct, of City or any of its elected officials, officers, officials, employees, agents or volunteers. 
If Contractor should subcontract all or any portion of the services to be performed under this Agreement, Contractor shall require each subcontractor to indemnify, hold harmless and defend City and each of its elected officials, officers, officials, employees, agents and volunteers in accordance with the terms of the preceding paragraph. 
This section shall survive termination or expiration of this Agreement. 
SECTION 14: INSURANCE 
Throughout the life of this Agreement, Contractor shall pay for and maintain in full force and effect all policies of insurance required hereunder with an insurance company(ies) either (i) admitted by the California Insurance Commissioner to do business in the State of California and rated not less than "A:VII" in Best's Insurance Rating Guide, or (ii) authorized by the City Manager or his/her designee at any time and in his/her sole discretion. The following policies of insurance are required: 
(i) 
COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY insurance which shall be at least as broad as the most current version of Insurance Services Office (ISO) Commercial General Liability Coverage Form CG 00 01 and include insurance for "bodily injury," "property damage" and "personal and advertising injury" with coverage for premises and operations (including the use of owned and non-owned equipment), products and completed operations, and contractual liability (including, without limitation, indemnity obligations under the Contract) with limits ofliability of not less than the following: 

$1,000,000 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage $1,000,000 per occurrence for personal and advertising injury $1,000,000 aggregate for products and completed operations $2,000,000 general aggregate 

(ii) 
COMMERCIAL AUTOMOBILE LIABILITY insurance which shall be at least as broad as the most current version of Insurance Service Office (ISO) Business Auto Coverage Form CA 00 01, and include coverage for Code 1 (any auto), or if Contractor has no owned autos, Code 8 (hired) and Code 9 (non-owned), with limits of liability of not less than $1,000,000 per accident for bodily injury and property damage. 


(iii) WORKERS' COMPENSATION insurance as required under the California Labor Code. 
(iv) 
EMPLOYERS' LIABILITY insurance with limits of liability of not less than $1,000,000 each accident, $1,000,000 disease policy limit and $1,000,000 disease each employee. 

(v) 
PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY (ERRORS AND OMISSIONS) insurance appropriate to Contractor's profession, with limits ofliability of not less than $2,000,000 per claim/occurrence and $2,000,000 policy aggregate. 


In the event Contractor maintains broader coverage and/or higher limits than the minimums shown above, City requires and shall be entitled to the broader coverage and/or the higher limits maintained by Contractor. Any available insurance proceeds in excess of the specified minimum limits of insurance and coverage shall be available to City. 
Contractor shall be responsible for payment of any deductibles contained in any insurance policies required hereunder and Contractor shall also be responsible for payment of any self­insured retentions. Any deductibles or self-insured retentions must be declared to, and approved by, the City Manager or his/her designee. At the option of the City Manager or his/her designee, either: (i) the insurer shall reduce or eliminate such deductibles or self-insured retentions as respects to City, its elected officials, officers, officials, employees, agents and volunteers: or (ii) Contractor shall provide a financial guarantee, satisfactory to City Manager or his/her designee, guaranteeing payment of losses and related investigations, claim administration and defense expenses. At no time shall City be responsible for the payment of any deductibles or self-insured retentions. 
All policies of insurance required hereunder shall be endorsed to provide that the coverage shall not be cancelled, non-renewed, reduced in coverage or in limits except after 30 calendar day written notice has been given to City. Upon issuance by the insurer, broker, or agent of a notice of cancellation, non-renewal, or reduction in coverage or in limits, Contractor shall furnish City with a new certificate and applicable endorsements for such policy(ies ). In the event any policy is due to expire during the work to be performed for City, Contractor shall provide a new certificate, and applicable endorsements, evidencing renewal of such policy not less than 15 calendar days prior to the expiration date of the expiring policy. 
The General Liability and Automobile Liability insurance policies shall be written on an occurrence form and shall name City, its elected officials, officers, officials, employees, agents and volunteers as an additional insured. Such policy(ies) of insurance shall be endorsed so Contractor's insurance shall be primary and no contribution shall be required of City, its elected officials, officers, officials, employees, agents and volunteers. The coverage shall contain no special limitations on the scope of protection afforded to City, its elected officials, officers, officials, employees, agents or volunteers. The Workers' Compensation insurance policy shall contain a waiver of subrogation as to City, its elected officials, officers, officials, employees, agents and volunteers. 
If any of the required. policies provide coverage on a claims-made basis: 
I. The retroactive date must be shown, and must be before the effective date of the Agreement or the commencement of work by Contractor. 
Insurance must be maintained and evidence of insurance must be provided for at least five ( 5) years after completion of the contract of work or any expiration or termination of the Agreement or, in the alternative, the policy shall be endorsed to provide not less than a 5-year discovery period. 
3. 
If coverage is canceled or non-renewed, and not replaced with another claims-made policy form with a retroactive date prior to the effective date of the Agreement or the commencement of work by Contractor, Contractor must purchase extended reporting coverage for a minimum of five ( 5) years following the expiration or termination of the Agreement. 

4. 
A copy of the claims reporting requirements must be submitted to City for review. 

5. 
These requirements shall survive expiration or termination of the Agreement. 


Contractor shall furnish City with all certificate(s) and applicable endorsements effecting coverage required hereunder. All certificates and applicable endorsements are to be received by City and approved by City Manager or his/her designee prior to City's execution of the Agreement and before work commences. However, failure to obtain the required documents prior to the work beginning shall not waive Contractor's obligation to provide them. Upon request of City, Contractor shall immediately furnish City with a complete copy of any insurance policy required under this Agreement, including all endorsements, with said copy certified by the underwriter to be a true and correct copy of the original policy. This requirement shall survive expiration or termination of this Agreement. 
If at any time during the life of this Agreement or any extension, Contractor or any of its subcontractors fail to maintain any required insurance in full force and effect, all work under this Agreement shall be discontinued immediately, and all payments due or that become due to Contractor shall be withheld until notice is received by City that the required insurance has been restored to full force and effect and that the premiums therefore have been paid for a period satisfactory to City. Any failure to maintain the required insurance shall be sufficient cause for City to terminate this Agreement. No action taken by City hereunder shall in any way relieve Contractor of its responsibilities under this Agreement. 
The fact that insurance is obtained by Contractor shall not be deemed to release or diminish the liability of Contractor, including, without limitation, liability under the indemnity provisions of this Agreement. The duty to indemnify City and its elected officials, officers, officials, employees, agents and volunteers shall apply to all claims and liability regardless of whether any insurance policies are applicable. The policy limits do not act as a limitation upon the amount of indemnification to be provided by Contractor. Approval or purchase of any insurance contracts or policies shall in no way relieve from liability nor limit the liability of Contractor, its principals, officers, employees, agents, persons under the supervision of Contractor, vendors, 



suppliers, invitees, contractors, subcontractors, or anyone employed directly or indirectly by any of them. 
If Contractor should subcontract all or any portion of the services to be performed under this Agreement, Contractor shall require each subcontractor to provide insurance protection in favor of City, its elected officials, officers, officials, employees, agents and volunteers in accordance with the terms of each of the preceding paragraphs, except that the subcontractors' certificates and endorsements shall be on file with Contractor and City prior to the commencement of any work by the subcontractor. 
SECTION 15: OWNERSHIP OF WORK 
All finished or unfinished documents, studies, reports, computer files and materials prepared by Contractor and subcontractors under this Agreement shall be considered the property of the City and will be turned over to the City upon demand, but in any event, upon completion of the Project. The Contractor shall be allowed to retain copies of documents for his permanent records, if desired. 
SECTION 16: ASSIGNABILITY 
Contractor shall not assign, delegate, or transfer this Agreement or any work hereunder, nor assign any monies due or to become due hereunder, except as expressly stated herein. In no event shall any contractual relation be created between any third party and the City without prior written consent of the City. Consent to one assignment shall not be deemed to be consent to any subsequent assignment. 
SECTION 17: INTEGRATION: AMENDMENTS 
This Agreement sets forth the entire understanding of the parties with respect to the subject matter herein. There are no other agreements, expressed or implied, oral or written, except as set forth herein. This Agreement may be amended upon written mutual consent of both parties hereto. Amendment requiring changes in compensation shall be subject to the City's change order procedures. 
SECTION 18: NOTICES 
Notices and requests to the City or Contractor shall be delivered at the following addresses, either served personally to the designated representative or by U.S. Postal Service at the following addresses: 
City: Contractor: Carlo Tomaino Laura Tancredi-Baese, LCSW Assistant City Manager Chief Executive Officer City of La Mesa Home Start, Inc. 8130 Allison Avenue 5005 Texas Street, Suite 203 La Mesa, CA 91942 San Diego, CA 92108 619.667.1311 (619) 692-0727 ctomaino@cityoflamesa.us Ltancredi-baese@home-start.org 
SECTION 19: DISPUTE RESOLUTION 
The City shall require that all Contractors agree to submit any unresolved claims, counterclaims, disputes, controversies and other matters between them and the City or the Contractor and/or any subcontractors of any tier arising out of or relating to their agreement with the City or the breach thereof ("disputes") first to mediation and then if not resolved, to non-binding arbitration prior to initiating suit or judicial proceeding. 
If applicable -As provided in Public Contract Code section 9204, any claim filed by the Contractor on a public works project shall be reviewed by the City with 45 days and a written statement will be provided to the Contractor identifying what portion of the claim is disputed and what portion is undisputed. Upon receipt of a claim, the City and the Contractor may, by mutual agreement, extend the time period or it may be extended to allow City Council approval. The Contractor shall include reasonable documentation to support the claim. Any payment due on an undisputed portion of the claim shall be processed and made within 60 days after the City issues its written statement. 
SECTION 20: TERMINATION OF AGREEMENT FOR CAUSE OR CONVENIENCE 
If, through any cause, the Contractor shall fail to fulfill in timely and proper manner his obligations under this Agreement, or if the Contractor shall violate any of the covenants, agreements, or stipulations of this Agreement, the City shall thereupon have the right to terminate this Agreement immediately by giving written notice to the Contractor of such termination and specifying the effective date thereof. In such event, all finished or unfinished documents, data, studies, surveys, drawings, maps, models, photographs and reports prepared by the Contractor under this Agreement shall, at the option of the City, become its property and the Contractor shall be entitled to receive just and equitable compensation for any work satisfactorily completed hereunder. 
In addition to termination for cause, the City may terminate this Agreement for City's convenience upon not less than fifteen (15) days written notice to Contractor. Upon receipt of said notice, the Contractor shall immediately cease all work under this Agreement unless said notice provides otherwise. If this Agreement is terminated as provided in this paragraph for City's convenience, the Contractor shall be required to provide to City all finished or unfinished documents, data, studies, services, etc., prepared by the Contractor as may be requested by City 
8 
and such work shall become City's property upon payment to Contractor for the value of the work performed, less payments of compensation previously made. 
Notwithstanding the above, the Contractor shall not be relieved of liability to the City for damages sustained by the City by virtue of any breach of the Agreement by the Contractor, and the City may withhold any payments to the Contractor for the purpose of set-off until such time as the exact amount of damages due the City from the Contractor is determined. 
SECTION 21: INTEREST OF MEMBERS OF THE CITY 
No member of the governing body of the City and no other officer, employee, or agent of the City, who exercises any functions or responsibilities in connection with the planning and carrying out of the program, shall have any personal financial interest, direct or indirect, in this Agreement; and the Contractor shall take appropriate steps to assure compliance. 
SECTION 22: INTEREST OF CONTRACTOR AND EMPLOYEES; STATEMENT OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS 
The Contractor covenants that he presently has no interest and shall not acquire interest, direct or indirect, in the study area or any parcels therein or any other interest which would conflict in any manner or degree with the performance of his services hereunder. The Contractor further covenants, that in the performance of this Agreement, no person having any such interest shall be employed. City may require Contractor to complete and submit a Form 700, Statement of Economic Interests, in accordance with applicable law, to City Clerk. 
SECTION 23: FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT 
Contractor shall, at its sole cost and expense, furnish all facilities and equipment which may be required for furnishing services pursuant to this Agreement. 
SECTION 24: INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR 
At all times during the term of this Agreement, Contractor shall be an independent contractor and shall not be an employee of City. City shall have the right to control Contractor only insofar as the results of Contractor's services rendered pursuant to this Agreement; however, City shall not have the right to control the means by which Contractor accomplishes services rendered pursuant to this Agreement. 
SECTION 25: TIME 
Contractor shall devote such time to the performance of services pursuant to this Agreement as may be reasonably necessary for satisfactory performance of Contractor's obligations pursuant to this Agreement. 
SECTION 26: CONTRACTOR NOT AGENT 
Except as City may specify in writing, Contractor shall have no authority, express or implied, to act on behalf of City in any capacity whatsoever as an agent. Contractor shall have no authority, express or implied, pursuant to this Agreement to bind City to any obligation whatsoever. 
SECTION 27: NON-DISCLOSURE 
The designs, plans, reports, investigations, materials and documents prepared or acquired by the Contractor pursuant to this Agreement (including any duplicate copies kept by the Contractor) shall not be shown to any other public or private person or entity, except as authorized by the City. The Contractor shall not disclose to any other public or private person or entity any information regarding the activities of the City except as authorized by the City. 
SECTION 28: SUBCONTRACTING 
None of the services covered by the Agreement shall be subcontracted without the prior consent of the City. The Contractor shall be as fully responsible to the City for the acts and omissions of his subcontractors, and of persons either directly or indirectly employed by them, as he is for the acts and omissions of persons directly employed by him. The Contractor shall insert in each subcontract appropriate provisions requiring compliance with the labor standards provisions of this Agreement. 
SECTION 29: CHANGES 
The City may, from time to time, request changes in the Scope of Services of the Contract to be performed hereunder. Such changes, including any increase or decrease in the amount of the Contractor's compensation, which are mutually agreed upon by and between the City and the Contractor shall be incorporated to this Contract. 
SECTION 30: JOB SITE SAFETY 
The general or prime Contractor who is responsible for means, methods and procedures of the project shall be responsible for job site safety. 
The prime contractor and all subcontractors of all tiers shall: 
A. Be responsible for the safety of their respective employees as required by law. 
B. Come under the jurisdiction and supervision of the general or prime contractor's job site safety program. 
C. Exercise reasonable care to avoid risk of injury to others as required by the professional standard of care. 
SECTION 31: PREVAILING WAGES FOR PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS-IF APPLICABLE 
A. No professional contractor or subcontractor subject to the requirements of State of California's prevailing wages may be awarded a contract, or contracted with, for a public works project 
(submitted on or after April 1, 2015) unless registered with the Department of Industrial 
Relations pursuant to Labor Code section 1725.5 [ with limited exceptions from this 
requirement for bid purposes only under Labor Code section 1771.l(a)]. 
B. This project is subject to compliance monitoring and enforcement by the Department of Industrial Relations. 
SECTION 32: PERS ELIGIBILITY INDEMNIFICATION 
In the event that Contractor's employee providing services under this Agreement claims or is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction or the California Public Employees Retirement System (PERS) to be eligible for enrollment in PERS of the City, Contractor shall indemnify, defend, and hold hannless City for the payment of any employer and employee contributions for PERS benefits on behalf of the employee as well as for payment of any penalties and interest on such contributions which would otherwise be the responsibility of the City. 
Notwithstanding any other agency, state or federal policy, rule, regulation, law or ordinance to the contrary, Contractor's employees providing service under this Agreement shall not qualify for or become entitled to, and hereby agree to waive any claims to, any compensation and benefit including but not limited to eligibility to enroll in PERS as an employee of City and entitlement to any contributions to be paid by City for employer contributions and/or employee contributions for PERS benefits. 


SECTION 33: DATE OF AGREEMENT The date of this Agreement shall be the date it shall have been signed by a duly authorized representative of City.IN WITNESS WHEREOF, City and Contractor have executed the Agreement. Home Start, Inc. 
,,-
,,



Date: 
Chief Executive Officer 


EXHIBIT A SCOPE OF SERVICES 

Description of the Program: 
The purpose of this program is to assist La Mesa residents (individuals and families) directly impacted by a loss of income due to the COVID-19 public health emergency. Assistance will be provided in the form of rental payments directly to landlords help residents avoid eviction. 

Which Households ARE Eligible (all must be true): 
Rent payment must be for a property located within City limits. 
1. 
Must have a written lease with verifiable address. Adult tenants (18 years or older) need to be named on the lease agreement. 

2. 
Total household income (all persons over 18 years old) within the past 30-days must be at or below the following: 



San Diego County Annual Income Limits Effective April 1, 2020  
FAMILY SIZE  80%eof AMI Low Income  50%eofAMI Very Low Income  Extremely Low Income  
1  64,700  40,450  24,300  
2  73,950  46,200  27,750  
3  83,200  52,000  31,200  
4  92,400  57,750  34,650  
5  99,800  62,400  37,450  
6  107,200  67,000  40,200  
7  114,600  71,650  43,000  
8  122,000  76,250  45,750  


3. Households experiencing loss of income directly related to COVID-19. 
A. Must have documented job loss, lay off, reduced hours or wage reduction; or 
B. COVID-19 positive, or caring for someone who is COVID-19 positive; or 
C. Business closure (temporary or permanent) due to COVID-19. 

Which Households are NOTeligible: 
• 
Households receiving other government-based rental assistance (including Tenant-Based Vouchers, Housing Choice Vouchers, Project Based Voucher projects). 

• 
Must not be facing current eviction/foreclosureproceedings for issues other than non-payment of rent from March 1 to the present. 

• 
If rent is past due prior to March 1, 2020. 

• 
Households residing in Public Housing. 



Financial Assistance Provided: 
• 
One (1) to Three (3) months of rental payment assistance. 

• 
Assistance may cover past due balance for rent beginning no earlier March 1, 2020 

• 
Maximum Amounts: 

• Rent: Up to $2,500 per month to cover past due rent from April I onward related to COVID-19. Applicants may qualify for one (I) to three (3) months of assistance for rent for a maximum amount of$5,000. 

• 
Payments will be made directly to landlord on behalf of household (with household verification). 


1. Marketing and Pre-Application Activities: 
• 
Consultant shall develop marketing materials such as flyers in multiple languages and create a webpage promoting the program, outlining requirements, and explaining the application process; marketing materials shall be translated into Spanish, Arabic, and any other language deemed necessary to communicate with residents. 

• 
City will announce the program opening on the City's website, issue a press release, and promote the program on its social media. 

• 
Consultant shall announce the program on its website and social media. 


• 
Consultant's marketing materials shall include a contact person, phone number, and email where residents may submit questions in advance of the application period. 

• 
Consultant shall host one (I) online webinar a week in advance of the application period to explain the program and the application process. City may request additional webinars as needed. 

• 
Consultant shall develop presentation materials for the webinar in multiple languages, and present the materials during the webinar. 

• 
Develop an online portal to accept applications and make applications widely available to City residents; the system will have the ability to date and timestamp applications received and allow residents to upload supporting documentation. 


2. Application Process Administered by Consultant: 
• 
The Application Period shall be at least one week but may be extended if necessary based on mutual consent by the City and the Consultant. Extension of the Application Period shall be marketed to La Mesa residents using the same methods prescribed in the section above. 

• 
Accept applications on a first-come first-served basis by online submission, email scans, hard copies, and in-person appointments at Consultant's office. Consultant shall date and time stamp all materials received and cross reference online, email, and in-person submissions to ensure applications are processed on a first-come, first served basis. 

• 
Consultant shall maintain a complete database of applications received including the date and time applications were submitted. This database will be made available to the City for review along with the final database for documentation purposes. 

• 
Consultant shall work with residents to complete applications in the order received; including providing help to residents that need assistance submitting supporting documentation. 

• 
Documents to be submitted include the following: 


o 
Rental Assistance Application; 

o 
Certifications of income, relationship to COVID-19 (i.e., job loss, reduction of income, closure of business, and related factors), and certification that household is not receiving any other government-based housing assistance; 

o 
The two most recent paystubs (household member names and address must match address on lease); 

o 
Severance or reduction of hours documentation from employer; 

o 
Proof of application for unemployment benefits, or proof of denial of unemployment benefits; 




o 
Copy of current lease agreement with landlord's contact information (oral lease agreements are not eligible for assistance); 

o 
Copy of past due, eviction, (rent due must be itemized by month); 

o 
Proof of residency in La Mesa (i.e., water or electric bill). 


• 
Prior to making a final determination of eligibility, Consultant shall confer with the City and provide a list of eligible recipients. 

• 
Consultant shall confirm the accuracy of the information submitted with the application and maintain and ensure the confidentiality of all records submitted. 


3. Proposed Schedule 
• 
Program Marketing: August 24 through September 3. 

• 
Application Period: August 31 (8:00 a.m.) through September 4 (Midnight) 

• 
Application Review Period: September 7 through October 15 

• 
Grant Award Period: September 7 through October 30 (Rolling Basis): 


4. Funding Disbursement 
• 
The project budget is $600,000, including direct rental assistance for eligible residents and all program operating expenses. 

• 
City shall place funds into a Trust Account the Consultant will use to draw down funds. 

• 
After confirming eligibility and receiving approval from the City, Consultant shall issue checks directly to the qualified La Mesa recipients' landlord. 

• 
Consultant shall submit weekly reports detailing the number of residents assisted and the amount of assistance provided. 

• 
Consultant shall also remit to the City monthly invoices detailing the fuods disbursed along with its operating cost costs. 


5. Notification to Program Recipients: 
• For each grant award, consultant shall prepare a letter addressed to the landlord informing them of the (I) check amount and (2) the period of time the check covers on behalf of the tenant. The letter to the landlord shall include the full name of the tenant as it appears on their lease along with the complete address. The Consultant shall also mail or email a copy of the letter along with a copy of the check to the tenant. 

• Consultant will provide electronic copies of all letters will be provided to the City for documentation purposes. 
6. Program Close-Out: 
• 
Consultant must communicate to City and residents how it will determine which households will receive assistance and at what point it will stop taking applications. 

• 
City and Consultant will jointly prepare a plan for armouncements of suspension or termination of the program due to oversubscription 


7. General Requirements During Contract Period: 
• 
Maintain staff to serve t!Ie needs of the program. 

• 
Provide assistance in English, Spanish, and Arabic. 

• 
Maintain complete records of applications and documents submitted; provide all records to City in electronic format. 

• 
Provide t!Ie City with weekly updates regarding t!Ie number of applications received, applications processed, and grant amounts awarded. 

• 
Consultant shall not, in any way, give priority to its existing clients; all applications must be reviewed in the order received. 

• 
Be and remain in compliance with the restrictions outlined in t!Ie Guidance for State, Territorial, Local and Tribal Governments, Coronavirus Relief Fund Frequently Asked Questions and section 60 I ( d) of the Social Security Act as added by section 500 I if the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act ("CARES Act"). 


8. Follow-Up Audit: 
• The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act funding is subject to a Federal audit. Funds may only be used on eligible expenditures. Consultant shall, based on written request by t!Ie City, provide information to assist in completing the auditing process. 

EXHIBIT B COST PROPOSAL 
Alianab. A'hmad -Housin" Snecialist -1 FTE -840 hours  $  16,800.00  
Castellanos, Andrea -Housino Soecialist-.5 FTE -420 hours  $  8,400.00  
Horton, Vmn -Accounts Pavable-.07 FTE-59 hours  $  1,180.00  
OroJorno, Sarah-Team Leader -.15 FTE -126 hours  $  2,646.00  
Pollick, Lauren -Denutv Director of Housin" -.07 FTE-59 hours  $  1,852.00  
Benefits at 28%  $  8,645.84  
Pro=am Ooerations: Facilitv, Utilities, and Maintenance-$220/month  $  1,100.00  
Telenhone, Fax, Internet -$70/month  $  350.00  
TraveVMilea!!e -$120/month  $  600.00  
Prooram Deliver., Sunnlies-$120/month  $  600.00  
Flex funds-"as cards, =ocerv cards, vouchers  $  3,000.00  
Enninment-Laotoos  $  1,255.00  
Indirect Costs-5%-Administrative Overhead (Reduced from Federally  
A=roved Indirect Rate of 18. 7%)  $  28,571.16  
Total cost for Home Start services  $  75,000.00  
Rental Assistance-105 households x max $5,000  $  525,000.00  
Total amount of funding  $  600,000.00  



