COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE CHARTERED CITY OF VISTA AND OPERATION HOPE 
THIS COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT AGREEMENT ("Agreement") is made and entered into this July 1, 2019, by and between the CITY OF VISTA, a chartered municipal corporation ("City") and OPERATION HOPE a California nonprofit corporation ("Subrecipient"). 
RECITALS 
A. The City has entered into various funding agreements with the United States 
Department of Housing and Urban Development ("HUD"), which agreements provide funds ("CDBG Funds" CFDA No. 14.218) to the City under the Federal Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 USC Sections 5301 et seq.), as amended from time to time (the "Act"), and the regulations promulgated thereunder 24 CFR Sections 570 et seq. ("Regulations"). 
B. The Act provides that the City may use CDBG funds to engage organizations to 
provide eligible services for certain purposes allowed under the Act. 
C. The Subrecipient proposes to provide emergency shelter to families and single 
woman and provide weekly case management support and classes to build client skill sets in order to prepare them for success in independence. 
NOW, THEREFORE, the parties hereto agree as follows: 
1.0 SUBRECIPIENT OBLIGATIONS 
1.1 Provision of Eligible Services; Use of CDBG Funds. Subrecipient hereby 
agrees to provide those services described in Exhibit A ("Services" or "Project"), which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by this reference. For performing the Project, Subrecipient shall receive the compensation set forth in Exhibit B, Project Compensation, which is attached hereto as Exhibit B and incorporated herein by this reference. Subrecipient understands that the Project Compensation will be paid from CDBG funds and such amounts shall be received and utilized solely for the Project pursuant to all of the terms and conditions of this Agreement. Only actual expenses incurred by Subrecipient are eligible for reimbursement, and then only to the extent allowed by this Agreement. In no event shall Subrecipient be eligible to receive compensation pursuant to this Agreement in excess of the maximum amount set forth in paragraph 2.1 of this Agreement. 
1.2 Representation and Warranties. Subrecipient hereby represents and warrants 
to the City as follows: 
a. Subrecipient has read and is familiar with all of the terms and provisions of 
the Act and the regulations applicable to Subrecipient. 
b. No condition or characteristic of Subrecipient makes it ineligible to receive CDBG funds under the Act and the regulations. 
c. Subrecipient will not use facilities, conduct the Project, or incur expenses in a manner which conflicts with or is unpermitted under the Act or for projects funded with CDBG funds. 
1 
d. The Project, as performed by Subrecipient, will not be subject to the Davis-
Bacon Act, 40 USC Sections 276a et seq., as amended from time to time. 
e. The Project, as performed by Subrecipient, will not necessitate compliance 
with the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970, 42 USC Section 4601 et seq., as amended from time to time. 
1.3 Compliance with Law. Subrecipient shall perform the Project and operate the facility, if any, in accordance with all ordinances, resolutions, statutes, rules, and regulations of the City and any Federal, State or local governmental agency having jurisdiction in effect at the time service is rendered, including, but not limited to the Act and the regulations. Particularly, Subrecipient shall comply with the requirements and standards of the following: 
a. 24 CFR Part 85 "Uniform Administrative Requirements for Grants and Cooperative Agreements to State, Local, and Federally-recognized Indian Tribal Governments" 
b. 2 CFR 200 -Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and 
Audit Requirements for Federal Awards, effective December 26, 2014; 
c. 0MB Circular No. A-122 "Cost Principles for Non-Profit Organizations" or 0MB Circular No. A-21 "Cost Principles for Educational Institutions," as applicable; 
d. All Federal laws and regulations described in 24 CFR Part 84 and Subpart 
K of 24 CFR Part 570, including all affirmative action requirements set forth therein, but excluding the City's environmental responsibilities under 24 CFR Section 570.604 and the City's responsibility for initiating the review process under 24 CFR Part 52; and 
e. If Subrecipient is a religious organization, as defined by the regulations, all 
conditions prescribed by HUD for the use of CDBG funds by religious organizations. 
1.4 Licenses, Permits, Fees and Assessments. Subrecipient shall obtain, at its sole cost and expense, such licenses, permits and approvals as may be required by law for the performance of the Project and the operation of the facility. 
1.5 Personnel and Participant Conditions. 
a. Civil Rights 
(1) Compliance. The Subrecipient agrees to comply with City and State civil rights ordinances and with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 as amended, Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968 as amended, Section 109 of Title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 197 4, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, Executive Order 11063, Executive Order 13166, and with Executive Order 11246 as amended by Executive Orders 11375 and 12086. 
(2) Nondiscrimination. The Subrecipient will not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of race, color, creed, religion, ancestry, national origin, sex, disability or other handicap, age, marital status, or status with regard to public assistance. The Subrecipient will take affirmative action to insure that all employment practices are free from such discrimination. Such employment practices include but are not limited to the following: hiring, upgrading, demotion, transfer, recruitment or recruitment advertising, layoff, 
2 
termination, rates of pay or other forms of compensation, and selection for training, including apprenticeship. The Subrecipient agrees to post in conspicuous places, available to employees and applicants for employment, notices to be provided by the contracting agency setting forth the provisions of this nondiscrimination clause. 
(3) Land Covenants. This agreement is subject to the requirements of 
Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (P.L. 88-352) and 24 CFR 570, part I. In regard to the sale, lease, or other transfer of land acquired, cleared or improved with assistance provided under this agreement, the Subrecipient shall cause or require a covenant running with the land to be inserted in the deed or lease for such transfer, prohibiting discrimination as herein defined, in the sale, lease or rental, or in the use or occupancy of such land, or in any improvements erected or to be erected thereon, providing that the City of Vista and the United States are beneficiaries of and entitled to enforce such covenants. The Subrecipient, in undertaking its obligation to carry out the program assisted hereunder, agrees to take such measures as are necessary to enforce such covenant, and will not itself so discriminate. 
(4) Section 504. The Subrecipient agrees to comply with any federal regulations issued pursuant to compliance with Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, (29 
U.S.C. 721) that prohibits discrimination against the handicapped in any federally assisted program. The City of Vista shall provide the Subrecipient with any guidelines necessary for compliance with that portion of the regulations in force during the term of this agreement. 
(5) Access to Service for Persons with Limited English Proficiency. 
The Subrecipient will take reasonable steps to ensure meaningful access to their programs and activities by Limited English Proficiency (LEP) persons as provided in President's Executive Order 13166 of August 11, 2000. The City of Vista shall provide the Subrecipient with guidelines necessary for compliance. 
b. Affirmative Action 
(1) Approved Plan. The Subrecipient agrees that it shall be committed 
to carry out pursuant to the City of Vista's specifications an Affirmative Action Program in keeping with the principles as provided in President's Executive Order 11246 of September 24, 1965. The City of Vista shall provide Affirmative Action guidelines to the Subrecipient to assist in the formulation of such program. The Subrecipient shall submit a plan for an Affirmative Action Program for approval prior to the award of funds. 
(2) W/MBE. The Subrecipient will use its best efforts to afford minority 
and women-owned business enterprises the maximum practicable opportunity to participate in the performance of this agreement. As used in this agreement, the term "minority and female business enterprise" means a business at least 51% owned and controlled by minority group members or women. For the purposes of this definition, "minority group members" are Afro­Americans, Spanish-speaking, Spanish surnamed or Spanish-heritage Americans, Asian­Americans, and American Indians. The Subrecipient may rely on written representations by Subrecipients regarding their status as minority and female business enterprises in lieu of an independent investigation. 
(3) Access to Records. The Subrecipient shall furnish and cause each of its sub-subrecipients to furnish all information and reports required hereunder and will permit access to its books, records and accounts by the Grantee, HUD or its agent, or other authorized 
3 
federal officials for purposes of investigation to ascertain compliance with the rules, regulations and provisions stated herein. 
(4) Notifications. The Subrecipient will send to each labor union or 
representative of workers with which it has a collective bargaining agreement or other contract or understanding, a notice, to be provided by the agency contracting officer, advising the labor union or worker's representative of the Subrecipient's commitments hereunder, and shall post copies of the notice in conspicuous places available to employees and applicants for employment. 
(5) 
EEO/AA Statement. The Subrecipient will, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by or on behalf of the Subrecipient, state that it is an Equal Opportunity or Affirmative Action employer. 

(6) 
Subcontract Provisions. The Subrecipient will include the provisions of Paragraphs VIII A, Civil Rights, and B, Affirmative Action, in every subcontract or purchase order, specifically or by reference, so that such provisions will be binding upon each sub-Subrecipient or vendor. 

c. Employment Restrictions 

(1) 
Prohibited Activity.The Subrecipient is prohibited from using funds provided herein or personnel employed in the administration of the program for political activities; sectarian, or religious activities; lobbying, political patronage, and nepotism activities. 

(2) 
OSHA. Where employees are engaged in activities not covered under the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, they shall not be required or permitted to work, be trained, or receive services in buildings or surroundings or under working conditions which are unsanitary, hazardous or dangerous to the participants' health or safety. 

"Section 3" Clause 

(1) 
Compliance. Compliance with the provisions of Section 3, the regulations set forth in 24 CFR 135, and all applicable rules and orders issued hereunder prior to the execution of this agreement and binding upon the City of Vista, the Subrecipient and any sub­Subrecipients. Failure to fulfill these requirements shall subject the City of Vista, the Subrecipient and any sub-Subrecipients, their successors and assigns, to those sanctions specified by the agreement through which federal assistance is provided. The Subrecipient certifies and agrees that no contractual or other disability exists which would prevent compliance with these requirements. 


The Subrecipient further agrees to comply with these "Section 3" requirements and to include the following language in all subcontracts executed under this agreement: 
The work to be performed under this agreement is a project assisted under a program providing direct federal financial assistance from HUD and is subject to the requirements of Section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968, as amended, 12 
U.S.C. 1701. Section 3 requires that to the greatest extent feasible opportunities for training and employment be given to lower income residents of the Project area and contracts for work in connection with the Project be awarded to business concerns which are located in, or owned in substantial part by persons residing in the areas of the Project." 
4 
The Subrecipient certifies and agrees that no contractual or other disability exists which would prevent compliance with the requirements. 
(2) Notifications. The Subrecipient agrees to send to each labor 
organization or representative of workers with which it has a collective bargaining agreement or other contract or understanding, if any, a notice advising said labor organization or worker's representative of its commitments under this Section 3 clause and shall post copies of the notice in conspicuous places available to employees and applicants for employment or training. 
(3) Subcontracts. The Subrecipient will include this Section 3 clause 
in every subcontract and will take appropriate action pursuant to the subcontract upon a finding that the sub-Subrecipient is in violation of regulations issued by the grantor agency. The Subrecipient will not subcontract with any sub-Subrecipient where it has notice of knowledge that the latter has been found in violation of regulations under 24 CFR 135 and will not let any subcontract unless the sub-Subrecipient has first provided it with a preliminary statement of ability to comply with the requirements of these regulations. 
1.6 Further Responsibilities of Parties. Both parties agree to use reasonable care 
and diligence to perform their respective obligations under this Agreement. Both parties agree to act in good faith to execute all instruments, prepare all documents, and take all actions as may be reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of this Agreement. Unless hereafter specified, neither party shall be responsible for the obligations of the other. 
2.0 DISBURSEMENT OF CDBG FUNDS 
2.1 Maximum Amount of CDBG Funds. The maximum amount of CDBG funds to be provided to Subrecipient is $26,000. Subrecipient hereby acknowledges that the City cannot guarantee that the CDBG funds will be received from HUD. The City's obligation to fund the work hereunder is limited to the availability of CDBG funds from HUD. If the CDBG funds are not forthcoming from HUD for any reason, the City shall not have any obligation to fund the work through any other source of funds. 
2.2 Method of Payment. Unless otherwise specified in Exhibit "A", at least quarterly, 
Subrecipient shall submit to the Contract Officer an invoice, in a form acceptable to the City, setting forth the value of the services and the amounts or reimbursable expenses actually incurred by Subrecipient for the Project; provided that said services or expenses are included in the budget (Exhibit "B") and performance standards have been met. Said invoice shall, at a minimum, set forth each budget category for which payment is sought, a description of the services or expense, the total budgeted amount for the category, the amount requested to be paid for each budget category, and the total amount expended for each budget category to date. Said invoice shall be accompanied with such additional supporting information as requested by the City, including, but not limited to, paid receipts for each expense. To the extent the CDBG funds actually have been received from HUD, the City shall pay Subrecipient for all services and expenses stated on the invoice which are approved by City pursuant to this Agreement no later than the thirtieth day after the invoice is received. 
2.3 Program Income. Any program income, as such term is defined in the regulations, received by Subrecipient shall be retained by Subrecipient. The program income received by Subrecipient shall solely be used for the Project or for the purpose of operating the facility. All provisions of this Agreement shall apply to activities funded by program income. All program income shall be expended by Subrecipient before the City is obligated to advance any 
5 
other CDBG funds to Subrecipient under this Agreement. Program income and expenditures shall be reported to the City at least quarterly. 
2.4 Separation of Funds. The Subrecipient shall certify that the Subrecipient's 
financial system is in accordance with the standards specified in 0MB Circular 110, or 24 CFR Part 84. 
2.5 Indirect Costs. If indirect costs are charged, the Subrecipient will develop an 
indirect cost allocation plan for determining the appropriate City of Vista share of administrative costs and shall submit such plan to the City of Vista for approval. 
3.0 PERFORMANCE SCHEDULE 
3.1 Schedule of Performance. Subrecipient shall commence, prosecute and complete the Project within the time periods established in the "Statement of Work" attached hereto as Exhibit "A" and incorporated herein by this reference. 
3.2 Term. Unless earlier terminated in accordance with Section 7.4 of this Agreement, 
this Agreement shall continue in full force and effect until June 30, 2020. 
3.3 Reversion of Assets. Upon the expiration or sooner termination of this Agreement, Subrecipient shall (i) transfer to the City any and all unearned CDBG funds and program income on hand (ii) any accounts receivable attributable to the use of CDBG funds or program income; and (iii) if any CDBG funds or program income was used by Subrecipient to improve or acquire real property and said CDBG funds or program income was in excess of $25,000, Subrecipient shall either (a) use said real property to meet one of the national objectives specified in 24 CFR Section 570.208 for a period of five years after the termination or sooner expiration of this Agreement or (b) dispose of the real property and reimburse the City in an amount (together with any amounts previously repaid to the City) that is equal to the fair market value of the real property times a fraction, the numerator of which is equal to the amount of CDBG funds and/or other program income used to acquire or improve the property and denominator of which is equal to the fair market value of the real property immediately after the real property was acquired or improved with said funds. 
4.0 COORDINATION OF WORK 
4.1 Representative of Subrecipient. The Executive Director is hereby designated as being the representative of Subrecipient authorized to act in its behalf with respect to this Agreement and make all decisions in connection therewith. 
4.2 Contract Officer. Contract Officer shall be the City's CDBG Administrator or such person as may be designated by the City Manager. It shall be the Subrecipient's responsibility to assure that the Contract Officer is kept informed of the progress of the performance of the services and the Subrecipient shall refer any decisions that must be made by City to the Contract Officer. Unless otherwise specified herein, any approval of City required hereunder shall mean the approval of the Contract Officer. The Contract Officer shall have authority to sign all documents on behalf of the City required hereunder to carry out the terms of this Agreement. 
4.3 Prohibition Against Subcontracting or Assignment. Neither this Agreement nor any interest herein may be transferred, assigned, conveyed, hypothecated or encumbered voluntarily or by operation of law, whether for the benefit of creditors or otherwise, without the 
6 
prior written approval of City. Transfers restricted hereunder shall include the transfer to any person or group of persons acting in concert of more than 25% of the present ownership and/or control of Subrecipient, taking all transfers into account on a cumulative basis. In the event of any such unapproved transfer, including any bankruptcy proceeding, this Agreement shall be void. No approved transfer shall release the Subrecipient or any surety of Subrecipient of any liability hereunder without the express consent of City. 
4.4 Independent Contractor. Neither the City nor any of its employees shall have 
any control over the manner, mode or means by which Subrecipient, its agents or employees, perform the services required herein, except as otherwise set forth herein. City shall have no voice in the selection, discharge, supervision or control of Subrecipient's employees, servants, representatives or agents, or in fixing their number, compensation or hours of service. Subrecipient shall perform all services required herein as an independent contractor of City and shall remain at all times as to City a wholly independent contractor with only such obligations as are consistent with the role. Subrecipient shall not at any time or in any manner represent that it or any of its agents or employees are agents or employees of City. City shall not in any way or for any purpose become or be deemed to be a partner of Subrecipient in its business or otherwise of a joint venture or a member of any joint enterprise with Subrecipient. 
4.5 Conflict of Interest. The Subrecipient agrees to abide by the provisions of 24 
CFR 570.611 with respect to conflicts of interest, and covenants that it presently has no financial interest and shall not acquire any financial interest, direct or indirect, which would conflict in any manner or degree with the performance of services required under this Agreement. The Subrecipient further covenants that in the performance of this Agreement no persons having such a financial interest shall be employed or retained by the Subrecipient hereunder. These conflict of interest provisions apply to any person who is an employee, agent, consultant, officer, or elected official or appointed official of the City of Vista, or of any designated public agencies or subrecipients which are receiving funds under the CDBG Entitlement program. 
4.6 Lobbying. The Subrecipient hereby certifies that: 
a. No Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid, by or on 
behalf of it, to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress in connection with the awarding of any Federal contract, the making of any Federal grant, the making of any Federal loan, the entering into of any cooperative agreement, and the extension, continuation, renewal, amendment, or modification of any Federal contract, grant, loan, or co-operative agreement; 
b. If any funds other than Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress in connection with this Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement, it will complete and submit Standard Form-LLL, "Disclosure Form to Report Lobbying," in accordance with its instructions; 
c. It will require that the language of paragraph (d) of this certification be included in the award documents for all subawards at all tiers (including subcontracts, subgrants, and contracts under grants, loans, and cooperative agreements) and that all subrecipients shall certify and disclose accordingly; and 
7 
d. Lobbying Certification -Paragraph d 
This certification is a material representation of fact upon which reliance was 
placed when this transaction was made or entered into. Submission of this certification is a 
prerequisite for making or entering into this transaction imposed by section 1353, title 31, U.S. 
Code. Any person who fails to file the required certification shall be subject to a civil penalty of 
not less than $10,000 and not more than $100,000 for each such failure. 
5.0 INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION 
5.1 Insurance. Subrecipient agrees to defend, indemnify and save harmless City, its officers, agents, and employees from and against any and all claims, demands, losses, defense costs, or liability of any kind or nature which the City, its officers, agents, and employees may sustain or incur or which may be imposed upon them for injury to or death of persons, or damage to property as a result of arising out of, or in any manner connected with Subrecipient's performance under the terms of this Agreement, excepting only liability arising out of the sole negligence of the City. This indemnity shall survive the termination of this Agreement. 
Without limiting Subrecipient's indemnification, it is agreed that Subrecipient shall maintain in force at all times during the performance of this Agreement the following policy or policies or insurance covering its operations: 
a. 
Comprehensive General Liability, including Contractual Liability, products and completed operations liability, and Business Automobile liability, all of which shall include both bodily injury and property damage, with a combined single limit of $2,000,000.00. 

b. 
Workers' Compensation insurance as required by the State of California, with Statutory Limits, and Employers' Liability insurance with a limit of no less than $1,000,000 per accident for bodily injury or disease. Subrecipient's liability insurance policy shall contain the following clauses: 


1. 
The City of Vista is named as additional insured as respects operations of the named insured performed under contract with the City; and 

2. 
It is agreed that any insurance maintained by the City shall apply in excess of and not contribute with, insurance provided by this policy; 


3. All insurance policies required by this paragraph shall contain the 
following clause: This insurance shall not be canceled, limited or non-renewed until after 30 days written notice has been given to the City. 
Certificates of insurance evidencing the coverage required by the clauses set forth above shall be filed with the City prior to the effective date of this Agreement. This is a condition precedent to the formation of any obligation by the City to compensate Subrecipient under this Agreement. 
6.0 ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS 
6.1 Financial Management. 
a. Accounting Standards. The Subrecipient agrees to comply with 24 CFR Part 84 and agrees to adhere to the accounting principles and procedures required therein, utilize adequate internal controls, and maintain necessary source documentation for all costs incurred. 
b. Cost Principles. The Subrecipient shall administer its program in conformance with 0MB Circulars A-122, "Cost Principles for Non-Profit Organizations," or A-21, 
8 
"Cost Principles for Educational Institutions," as applicable for all costs incurred whether charged on a direct or indirect basis. 
6.2 Documentation and Record-Keeping 
a. Records to be Maintained. The Subrecipient shall maintain all records required by the Federal regulations specific in 24 CFR Part 570.506, and that are pertinent to the activities to be funded under this Agreement. Such records shall include but not be limited to: 
(1) 
Records providing a full description of each activity undertaken; 

(2) 
Records demonstrating that each activity undertaken meets one of 


the National Objectives of the CDBG program; 
(3) 
Records required to determine the eligibility of activities; 

(4) 
Records required to document the acquisition, improvement, use or 


disposition of real property acquired or improved with CDBG assistance; 
(5) Records documenting compliance with the fair housing and equal 
opportunity components of the CDBG program; 
(6)  Financial records as required by 24 CFR Part 570.502, and Part 84;  
and  
(7)  Other records necessary to document compliance with Subpart K  
of 24 CFR 570.  

b. Retention. The Subrecipient shall retain all records pertinent to expenditures incurred under this Agreement for a period of five years after the termination of all activities funded under this Agreement, or after the resolution of all Federal audit findings, whichever occurs later. Records for non-expendable property acquired with funds under this Agreement shall be retained for five years after final disposition of such property. Records for any displaced person must be kept for five years after he/she has received final payment. 
6.3 Client Data. The Subrecipient shall maintain client data demonstrating client eligibility for services provided. Such data shall include, but not be limited to, client name, address, income level or other basis for determining eligibility, and description of service provided. Such information shall be made available to City of Vista monitors or their designees for review upon request. 
6.4 Disclosure. The Subrecipient understands that client information collected under this Agreement is private and the use or disclosure of such information, when not directly connected with the administration of the City of Vista's or Subrecipient's responsibilities with respect to services provided under this Agreement, is prohibited by law unless written consent is obtained from such person receiving service and, in the case of a minor, that of a responsible parent/guardian. 
6.5 Property Records. The Subrecipient shall maintain real property inventory records which clearly identify properties purchased, improved or sold. Properties retained shall continue to meet eligibility criteria and shall conform with the "changes in use" restrictions specified in 24 CFR Parts 570.503(b)(8). 
6.6 National Objectives. The Subrecipient agrees to maintain documentation that demonstrates that the activities carried out with funds provided under this Agreement meet one or more of the CDBG program's national objectives: (a) benefit low/moderate income persons, 
(b) aid in the prevention or elimination of slums or blight, (c) meet community development needs having a particular urgency (as defined in 24 CFR Part 570.208). 
9 
6.7 Performance Monitoring. The City of Vista will monitor the performance of the 
Subrecipient against goals and performance standards required herein. Substandard 
performance as determined by the City of Vista will constitute non-compliance with this 
Agreement. If action to correct such substandard performance is not taken by the Subrecipient 
within a reasonable period of time after being notified by the City of Vista, contract suspension or 
termination procedures will be initiated. 
6.8 Close-Outs. Subrecipient obligation to the City of Vista shall not end until all close­
out requirements are completed. Activities during this close-out period shall include, but are not limited to: making final payments, disposing of program assets (including the return of all unused materials, equipment, unspent cash advances, program income balances, and receivable accounts to the City of Vista), and determining the custodianship of records. 
6.9 Audits and Inspections. All Subrecipient records with respect to any matters 
covered by this Agreement shall be made available to the City of Vista, granter agency, their designees or the Federal Government, at any time during normal business hours, as often as the City of Vista or grantor agency deems necessary, to audit, examine, and make excerpts or transcripts of all relevant data. Any deficiencies noted in audit reports must be fully cleared by the Subrecipient within 30 days after receipt by the Subrecipient. Failure of the Subrecipient to comply with the above audit requirements will constitute a violation of this Agreement and may result in the withholding of future payments. The Subrecipient hereby agrees to have an annual agency audit conducted in accordance with current City policy concerning Subrecipient audits. 
7.0 ENFORCEMENT OF AGREEMENT 
7.1 Applicable Law. This Agreement shall be construed and interpreted both as to validity and to performance of the parties in accordance with the laws of the State of California and the United States, as applicable. Legal actions concerning any dispute, claim or matter arising out of or in relation to this Agreement shall be instituted in the Superior Court of the County of San Diego, State of California, the United States District Court for the San Diego District of California, or any other appropriate court in San Diego County, and Subrecipient covenants and agrees to submit to the personal jurisdiction of such court in the event of such action. 
7.2 Disputes. In the event of any dispute arising under this Agreement, the injured party shall notify the insuring party in writing of its contentions by submitting a claim therefor. The injured party shall continue performing its obligations hereunder so long as the injuring party commences to cure such default within ten days of service of such notice and completes the cure of such default within 30 days after service of the notice, or such longer period as may be permitted by the injured party; provided that if the default is an immediate danger to the health, safety and general welfare, such immediate action may be necessary. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City may suspend any further payment of CDBG funds until Subrecipient is in compliance with this Agreement. Compliance with the provisions of this Section shall be a condition precedent to termination of this Agreement for cause and to any legal action, and such compliance shall not be a waiver of any party's right to take legal action in the event that the depute is not cured. 
7.3 Remedies Upon Default by Subrecipient. In addition to any other rights or remedies available at law or in equity, if Subrecipient fails to fulfill its obligations under this Agreement, City may, after compliance with the provisions of Section 7.2: 
a. Temporarily withhold payment of CDBG funds pending correction of the 
default by Subrecipient; 
10 
b. Refuse to advance all or any part of the CDBG funds for the Project and 
reallocate said funds to another activity; 
c.  Wholly or partially suspend or terminate the award and this Agreement;  
d.  Withhold further awards for the Project and/or the facility; and  
e.  Require Subrecipient to repay any CDBG funds which the City determines  

were not expended in compliance with the requirements of this Agreement, the Act or the regulations. 
Termination. 
a. For Cause. The City may terminate the Agreement in whole, or in part, whenever the City determines that the Subrecipient has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of the Agreement. 
b. For Convenience.The Parties may terminate the Agreement in whole, or in part, when all parties agree that the continuation of the Project would not produce beneficial results commensurate with the future disbursement of funds. 
c. Due to Reduction or Termination of CDBG Funding.At the discretion of the City, the Agreement may be terminated in whole, or in part, if there is a reduction or termination of CDBG Federal block grant funds to the City. 
7.5 Waiver. No delay or omission in the exercise of any right or remedy by a nondefaulting party on any default shall impair such right or remedy or be construed as a waiver. A party's consent to or approval of any act by the other party requiring the party's consent or approval shall not be deemed to waive or render unnecessary the other party's consent to or approval of any subsequent act. Any waiver by either party of any default must be in writing and shall not be a waiver of any other default concerning the same or any other provision of this Agreement. 
7.6 Rights and Remedies are Cumulative. Except with respect to rights and remedies expressly declared to be exclusive in this Agreement, the rights and remedies of the parties are cumulative and the exercise by either party of one or more of such rights or remedies shall not preclude the exercise by it, at the same or different times, of any other rights or remedies for the same default or any other default by the other party. 
7.7 Legal Action. In addition to any other rights or remedies, either party may take legal action, in law or in equity, to cure, correct or remedy any default, to recover damages for any default, to complete specific performance of this Agreement, to obtain declaratory or injunctive relief, or to obtain any other remedy consistent with the purposes of the Agreement. 
7.8 Attorneys' Fees. If either party to this Agreement is required to initiate or defend or made a party to any action or proceeding in any way connected with this Agreement, the prevailing party in such action or proceeding, in addition to any other relief which may be granted, whether legal or equitable, shall be entitled to reasonable attorney's fees. Attorney fees shall include attorney's fees on any appeal, and in addition a party entitled to attorney's fees shall be entitled to all other reasonable costs for investigating such action, taking depositions and discovery and all other necessary costs the court allows which are incurred in such litigation. All such fees shall be deemed to have accrued on commencement of such action and shall be enforceable whether or not such action is prosecuted to judgement. 
11 
8.0 CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
8.1 Non-liability of City Officers and Employees. No officer or employee of the City shall be personally liable to the Subrecipient, or any successor in interest, in the event of any default or breach by the City or for any amount which may become due to the Subrecipient or to its successor, or for breach of any obligation of the terms of this Agreement. 
8.2 Conflict of Interest. No officer or employee of the City shall have any financial 
interest, direct or indirect, in this Agreement nor shall any such officer or employee participate in any decision relating to the Agreement which affects his financial interest or the financial interest of any corporation, partnership or association in which he is, directly or indirectly, interested, in violation of any State statute or regulation. The Subrecipient warrants that it has not paid or given and will not pay or give any third party any money or other consideration for obtaining this Agreement. 
8.3 Compliance with Code. Subrecipient agrees that, to the extent applicable, it shall 
comply with and be bound by all laws and regulations deriving from the relationship of the Subrecipient to the City, including the Political Reform Act (Government Codes Section 87100 et seq.) Chapters 2.32 or 2.33 of the Vista Municipal Code, the Community Redevelopment Act (Health & Safety Code 33000 et seq.) and all regulations promulgated thereunder (collectively "Conflict Laws"). As a condition precedent to the formation of this Agreement, Consultant warrants and covenants that it is adequately informed regarding the obligations and duties imposed by the Conflict Laws and that to the best of Subrecipient's knowledge and belief, there exists no conflict of interest (under the laws) that would disqualify the Subrecipient from participation in any decisions arising out of the performance of this Agreement. Prior to commencement of any work in the performance of this Agreement, Subrecipient shall comply with any applicable requirements of Chapter 2.32 of the Vista Municipal Code, including any requirement to file a financial disclosure statement with the City Clerk. Subrecipient further agrees that no employee, agent or subcontractor for Subrecipient shall perform any work for the City pursuant to this Contract which will violate the Conflict Laws. 
9.0 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
9.1 Notice. Any notice, demand, request, document, consent, approval, or communication either party desires or is required to give to the other party or any other person shall be in writing and either served personally or sent by prepaid first-class mail. Any change to the Subrecipient address must be made in writing. Notice shall be deemed communicated at the time personally delivered or in 72 hours from the time of mailing if mailed as provided in this Section. 
To the City: City of Vista 
200 Civic Center Drive 
Vista, California 92084 
Attention: CDBG Program Administrator 
To the Subrecipient: Operation HOPE 
859 East Vista Way 
Vista, CA 92084 
Attn: Executive Director 
9.2 Interpretation. The terms of this Agreement shall be construed in accordance 
with the meaning of the language used and shall not be construed for or against either party by reason of the authorship of this Agreement or any other rule of construction which might otherwise apply. 
9.3 Integration; Amendment. It is understood that there are no oral agreements 
between the parties hereto affecting this Agreement and this Agreement supersedes and cancels any and all previous negotiations, arrangements, agreements and understandings, if any, between the parties, and none shall be used to interpret this Agreement. This Agreement may be amended at any time by the mutual consent of the parties by an instrument in writing. 
9.4 Severability. In the event that any one or more of the phrases, sentences, 
clauses, paragraphs, or sections contained in this Agreement shall be declared invalid or unenforceable by a valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, sentences, clauses, paragraphs, or sections of this Agreement that are hereby declared as severable and shall be interpreted to carry out the intent of the parties hereunder unless the invalid provision is so material that its invalidity deprives either party of the basic benefit of their bargain or renders this Agreement meaningless. 
9.5 Corporate Authority. The persons executing this Agreement on behalf of the parties hereby warrant that (i) such party is duly organized and existing, (ii) they are duly authorized to execute and deliver this Agreement on behalf of said party, (iii) by so executing this Agreement, such party is formally bound to the provisions of this Agreement. 
9.6. Nationality Act. Consultant hereby promises and agrees to comply with all of the 
provisions of the Federal Immigration and Nationality Act, 8 U.S.C.A. §1101, et seq.. as amended, and in connection therewith, shall not employ unauthorized aliens as defined therein. Consultant hereby promises and agrees to comply with all of the provisions of the Federal Immigration and Nationality Act, 8 U.S.C.A. §1101, et seq., as amended, and in connection therewith, shall not employ unauthorized aliens as defined therein. Should Subrecipient so employ such unauthorized aliens for the performance of work and/or services covered by this Agreement, and should any liability or sanctions be imposed against City for such use of unauthorized aliens, Subrecipient hereby agrees to and shall reimburse City for the cost of all such liabilities or sanctions imposed, together with any and all costs, including attorneys' fees, incurred by City. 
[continued on following page] 
9. 7 Counterparts.This Agreement may be executed in two or more counterparts, each of which shall be deemed an original but all of which together shall constitute one and the same instrument. 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, we have hereunto set our hands and seals. 

CITY OF VISTA, a chartered municipal corporation 

ATTEST:

Kathy Valdez, City Clerk 

APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
Darold Pieper, City Attorney 

By:JiMI. 
RISK MANAGEMENT REVIEW: 
Dolores Gascon, Risk Manager 
By.. 
APPROVED Jonathan B. Stone 1524101519 
OPERATION HOPE, a California nonprofit corporation 
By: [•_Jo.J..fnn

Signature 


Cbac, E3 S, a.\ et:an 
Print Name 
) o+e.c, D:1IxetJ >Hie dJ reCiO{)
Title 
By. 
!Jp
¥9 ure 
Print Name 

EXHIBIT A 
STATEMENT OF WORK 
Term of Contract: July 1, 2019t-June 30, 2020 Agency: Operation HOPE -North County 
Address: 859 E. Vista Way Vista, CA 92084 Contact Person: Nicole Ketcher, Director of Resource Development Phone: 760.536.3880 ext. 303 
Project Name: Operation HOPE 
PROJECT GOALS AND OBJECTIVES 
Goal: Reduce the number of families experiencing homelessness. 
Objective: Provide emergency shelter to families and single woman and provide weekly case management support and classes to build client skill sets in order to prepare them for success in independence. 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
1. 
Provide shelter, food, and classes to a minimum of 210 individuals. 

2. 
Provide weekly case management to all families staying at the shelter. 

3. 
Ensure 100% of school-aged children at the shelter will be enrolled in school and attending regularly. 

4. 
A minimum of 75% of families that complete their case management plan will move into transitional shelter or permanent housing upon exiting the program. 


REPORTING AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS 
1. 
Submit performance reports quarterly, by the 15th day of the month following the end of the reporting period (October, January, April, and July). Reporting forms provided by the City must be utilized. Quarterly reports must be submitted regardless of whether any activity took place during the reporting period. 

2. 
Submit expenditure reports and reimbursement requests quarterly, by the 15th day of the month following the end of the reporting period (October, January, April, and July). Expenditure and reimbursement request forms provided by the City must be utilized. Backup documentation for all expenditures must be included. Quarterly reports must be submitted regardless of whether any funds were expended during the reporting period. 

3. 
Attend Vista CDBG Grantee Workshop(s). 

4. 
Ensure program/agency information is included on 211 San Diego. 


Term of Contract: 
Agency: 
Address: 
Contact Person: 
Phone: Project Name: 
EXHIBITtS 
BUDGET July 1, 2019 -June 30, 2020 Operation HOPE -North County 859 E. Vista Way Vista, CA 92084 Nicole Ketcher, Director of Resource Development 760.536.3880 ext. 303 Operation HOPE 
Budget Category  Amount  
a. Salaries and Wages b. Fringe Benefits c. ConsultanUContract Services  $26,000.00  
Total Personnel Budget  $26,00.00  
a. Office Rent  
b. Utilities  
C. Telephone  
d. Office Supplies  
e. Equipment  
f. Printing/Duplication  
g. Travel/Conferences  
h. Other  
Total Non-Personnel Budget  
TOTAL PROJECT BUDGET  $26,000.00  


OPERHOP-01 SEBGE1 ACORD" DATE (MM/DD/YYYY) 
CERTIFICATE OF LIABILITY INSURANCE 
. 10/23/2019
I 
THIS CERTIFICATE IS ISSUED AS A MATTER OF INFORMATION ONLY AND CONFERS NO RIGHTS UPON THE CERTIFICATE HOLDER. THIS 
CERTIFICATE DOES NOT AFFIRMATIVELY OR NEGATIVELY AMEND, EXTEND OR ALTER THE COVERAGE AFFORDED BY THE POLICIES 
BELOW. THIS CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE DOES NOT CONSTITUTE A CONTRACT BETWEEN THE ISSUING INSURER($), AUTHORIZED 
REPRESENTATIVE OR PRODUCER, AND THE CERTIFICATE HOLDER. 
IMPORTANT: If the certificate holder is an ADDITIONAL INSURED, the policy(ies) must have ADDITIONAL INSURED provisions or be endorsed. 
If SUBROGATION IS WAIVED, subject to the terms and conditions of the policy, certain policies may require an endorsement. A statement on 
this certificate does not confer ri11hts to the certificate holder in lieu of such endorsement(s). 
C3 Risk & Insurance Services 
404 Camino Del Rio S. STE 410 
San Diego, CA 92108 
INSURED 
Operation Hope -Vista, Inc.t, 
P.O. Box 3273 
Vista, CA 92085 
COVERAGES CERTIFICATE NUMBER· mmi.CT 
NtI FAX
rllg,t.o, Ext): (760) 730-2939 rAJC,Nol
1.ts.s· policy(@.c3insurance.com 
:t(619) 864-710 6 
INSURERISl AFFORDING COVERAGE NAIC# 
INsuRERA ,Nonorofits Insurance Alliance Of California 
INSURER B: Insurance Comoanv Of The West 27847 
INSURERC: 
INSURER D: 
INSURER E: 
INSURER F: 
REVISION NUMBER 

CERTIFICATE HOLDER CANCELLATION . 
SHOULD ANY OF THE ABOVE DESCRIBED POLICIES BE CANCELLED BEFORE  
. The City of Vista 200 Civic Center Drive Vista, CA 92084 I  THE EXPIRATION DATE THEREOF, NOTICE WILL BE DELIVERED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE POLICY PROVISIONS. AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE w.  
ACORD 25 (201t6/03)  © 1988-2015 ACORD CORPORATION. All rights reserved.  
The ACORD name and logo are registered marks of ACORD  

POLICY NUMBER: 2019-18290 COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY Named Insured: Operation Hope-North County, Inc. CG 20 37 04 13 
THIS ENDORSEMENT CHANGES THE POLICY. PLEASE READ IT CAREFULLY. 

ADDITIONAL INSURED -OWNERS, LESSEES OR CONTRACTORS -COMPLETED OPERATIONS 
This endorsement modifies insurance provided under the following: 
COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY COVERAGE PART PRODUCTS/COMPLETED OPERATIONS LIABILITY COVERAGE PART 
SCHEDULE 
Name Of Additional Insured Person(s) Or Organization(s) Any person or organization that you are required to add as an additional insured on this policy, under a written contract or agreement currently in effect, or becoming effective during the term of this policy. The additional insured status will not be afforded with respect to liability arising out of or related to your activities as a real estate manager for that person or organization.  Location And Description Of Completed Operations All insured premises and operations.  


Information required to complete this Schedule, if not shown above, will be shown in the Declarations.  

A. Section II -Who Is An Insured is amended to B. include as an additional insured the person(s) or organization(s) shown in the Schedule, but only with respect to liability for "bodily injury" or "property damage" caused, in whole or in part, by "your work" at the location designated and described in the Schedule of this endorsement performed for that additional insured and included in the "products-completed operations hazard". 
However: 
1. 
The insurance afforded to such additional insured only applies to the extent permitted by law; and 

2. 
If coverage provided to the additional insured is required by a contract or agreement, the insurance afforded to such additional insured will not be broader than that which you are required by the contract or agreement to provide for such additional insured. 


With respect to the insurance afforded to these additional insureds, the following is added to Section Ill -Limits Of Insurance: 
If coverage provided to the additional insured is required by a contract or agreement, the most we will pay-on behalf of the additional insured is the amount of insurance: 
1. 
Required by the contract or agreement; or 

2. 
Available under the applicable Limits of Insurance shown in the Declarations; whichever is less. 


This endorsement shall not increase the applicable Limits of Insurance shown in the Declarations. 
CG 20 37 04 13 © Insurance Services Office, Inc., 2012 Page 1 of 1 
POLICY NUMBER: 2019-18290 COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY Named Insured: Operation Hope-North County, Inc. CG 20 26 04 13 
THIS ENDORSEMENT CHANGES THE POLICY. PLEASE READ IT CAREFULLY. 
ADDITiONAL INSURED -DESIGNATED PERSON OR ORGANIZATION 
This endorsement modifies insurance provided under the following: 
COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY COVERAGE PART 
SCHEDULE 
Name Of Additional Insured Person(s) Or Organization(s): Any person or organization that you are required to add as an additional insured on this policy, under a written contract or agreement currently in effect, or becoming effective during the term of this policy. The additional insured status will not be afforded with respect to liability arising out of or related to your activities as a real estate manager for that person or organization.  
Information required to complete this Schedule, if not shown above, will be shown in the Declarations.  

A.  Section II ­Who Is An Insured is amended to  B.  With respect to the insurance afforded to these  
include as an additional insured the person(s) or  additional insureds, the following is added to  
organization(s) shown in the Schedule, but only  Section Ill -Limits Of Insurance:  
with respect to liability for "bodily injury", "property  
damage" or "personal and advertising injury"  If coverage provided to the additional insured is  
caused, in whole or in part, by your acts or  required by a contract or agreement, the most we  
omissions or the acts or omissions of those acting  will pay on behalf of the additional insured is the  
on your behalf:  amount of insurance:  
1. In the performance of your ongoing operations;  1. Required by the contract or agreement; or  
or  2. Available under the applicable Limits of  
2. In connection with your premises owned by or  Insurance shown in the Declarations;  
rented to you.  whichever is less.  
However:  This endorsement shall not increase the  
1. The insurance afforded to such additional  applicable Limits of Insurance shown in the  
insured only applies to the extent permitted by  Declarations.  
law; and  
2. If coverage provided to the additional insured is  
required by a contract or agreement, the  
insurance afforded to such additional insured  
will not be broader than that which you are  
required by the contract or agreement to  
provide for such additional insured.  

CG 20 26 04 13 © Insurance Services Office, Inc., 2012 Page 1 of 1 

A Head for Insurance. A Heart far Nonprofits. 
THIS ENDORSEMENT CHANGES THE POLICY. PLEASE READ IT CAREFULLY. 
ADDITIONAL INSURED -MANAGERS OR LESSORS OF PREMISES 
This endorsement modifies insurance provided under the following: 
COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY COVERAGE PART 
SCHEDULE 
Designation Of Premises (Part Leased To You): Name Of Person(s) Or Organization(s) (Additional Insured): Any person or organization acting as a manager or lessor of a premises that you are required to name as an additional insured on this policy, under a written contract, lease or agreement currently in effect, or becoming effective during the term of this 'policy.  
Additional Premium: Included Information required to complete this Schedule, if not shown above, will be shown in the Declarations.  

A. Section II -Who Is An Insured is amended to include as an additional insured the person(s) or organization(s) shown in the Schedule, but only with respect to liability arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of that part of the premises leased to you, and only with respect to liability for "bodily injury", "property damage", or "personal and advertising injury", caused, in whole or in part, by your acts or omissions, or the acts or omissions of those acting on your behalf, subject to the following additional exclusions: 
This insurance does not apply to: 
1. 
Any "occurrence" which takes place after you cease to be a tenant in that premises. 

2. 
Any offense which constitutes "personal and advertising injury" which is committed after you cease to be a tenant in that premises; or 

3. 
Structural alterations, new construction or demolition operations performed by or on behalf of the person(s) or organization(s) shown in the Schedule. 


However: 
1. 
The insurance afforded to such additional insured only applies to the extent permitted by law; and 

2. 
If coverage provided to the additional insured is required by a contract or agreement, the insurance afforded to such additional insured will not be broader than that which you are required by the contract or agreement to provide for such additional insured. 


B. With respect to the insurance afforded to these additional insured, the following is added to Section Ill ­Limits Of Insurance: 
If coverage provided to the additional insured is required by a contract or agreement, the most we will pay on 
behalf of the additional insured is the amount of insurance: 
1. 
Required by the contract or agreement; or 

2. 
Available under the applicable Limits of Insurance shown in the Declarations; whichever is less. 


This endorsement shall not increase the applicable Limits of Insurance shown in the Declarations. 
NIAC-E67 08 17 Page 1 of 1 
1-.1 NONPROFITS
INSURANCE 
-ALLLANCE OF CALIFORNLA 
POLICY NUMBER: 2019-18290 
A Head for Insurance. A Heart for Nonprofits. 
THIS ENDORSEMENT CHANGES THE POLICY. PLEASE READ IT CAREFULLY. 



ADDITIONAL INSURED PRIMARY AND NON-CONTRIBUTORY ENDORSEMENT FOR PUBLIC ENTITIES 
This endorsement modifies insurance provided under the following: 
COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY COVERAGE PART 
SCHEDULE 
A. Section II -WHO IS AN INSURED is amended to include: 
4. Any public entity as an additional insured, and the officers, offscials, employees, agents and/or volunteers 
is
of that public entity, as applicable, who may be named in the Schedule above, when you have agreed in a written contract or written agreement presently in effect or becoming effective during the term of this policy, that such public entity and/or its officers, officials, employees, agents and/or volunteers be added as an additional insured(s) on your policy, but only with respect to liability for "bodily injury", "property damage" or "personal and advertising injury" caused, in whole or in part, by: 
a. 
Your negligent acts or omissions; or 

b. 
The negligent acts or omissions of those acting on your behalf; 


in the performance of your ongoing operations. 
No such public entity or individual is an additional insured for liability arising out of the sole negligence by 
that public entity or its designated individuals. The additional insured status will not be afforded with 
respect to liability arising out of or related to your activities as a real estate manager for that person or 
organization. 
B. Section Ill -LIMITS OF INSURANCE is amended to include: 
8. The limits of insurance applicable to the public entity and applicable individuals identified as an additional insured(s) pursuant to Provision A.4. above, are those specified in the written contract between you and that public entity, or the limits available under this policy, whichever are less. These limits are part of and not in addition to the limits of insurance under this policy. 
C. With respect to the insurance provided to the additional insured(s), Condition 4. Other Insurance of SECTION IV -COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY CONDITIONS is replaced by the following: 
4. Other Insurance 
a. Primary Insurance 
This insurance is primary if you have agreed in a written contract or written agreement: 
(1) That this insurance be primary. If other insurance is also primary, we will share with all that other insurance as described in c. below; or 
NIAC-E61 02 19 Page 1 of 2 

POLICY NUMBER: 2019-18290 
A Head for Insurance. A Heart for Nonprofits. 
(2) The coverage afforded by this insurance is primary and non-contributory with the additional insured(s)' own insurance. 
Paragraphs (1) and (2) do not apply to other insurance to which the additional insured(s) has been 
added as an additional insured or to other insurance described in paragraph b. below. 
b. Excessslnsurance 
This insurance is excess over: 
1. Any of the other insurance, whether primary, excess, contingent or on any other basis: 
(a) 
That is Fire, Extended Coverage, Builder's Risk, Installation Risk or similar coverage for "your work"; 

(b) 
That is fire, lightning, or explosion insurance for premises rented to you or temporarily occupied by you with permission of the owner; 

(c) 
That is insurance purchased by you to cover your liability as a tenant for "property damage" to premises temporarily occupied by you with permission of the owner; or 

(d) 
If the loss arises out of the maintenance or use of aircraft, "autos" or watercraft to the extent not subject to Exclusion g. of SECTION 1-COVERAGE A-BODILY INJURY AND PROPERTY DAMAGE. 

(e) 
Any other insurance available to an additional insured(s) under this Endorsement covering liability for damages which are subject to this endorsement and for which the additional insured{s) has been added as an additional insured by that other insurance. 

(1) 
When this insurance is excess, we will have no duty under Coverages A or B to defend the additional insured(s) against any "suit" if any other insurer has a duty to defend the additional insured(s) against that "suit". If no other insurer defends, we will undertake to do so, but we will be entitled to the additional insured(s)' rights against all those other insurers. 

(2) 
When this insurance is excess over other insurance, we will pay only our share of the amount of the loss, if any, that exceeds the sum of: 

(a) 
The total amount that all such other insurance would pay for the loss in the absence of this insurance; and 

(b) 
The total of all deductible and self-insured amounts under all that other insurance. 

(3) 
We will share the remaining loss, if any, with any other insurance that is not described in this Excess Insurance provision and was not bought specifically to apply in excess of the Limits of Insurance shown in the Declarations of this Coverage Part. 


c. Methods of Sharing 
If all of the other insurance available to the additional insured(s) permits contribution by equal 
shares, we will follow this method also. Under this approach each insurer contributes equal 
amounts until it has paid its applicable limit of insurance or none of the loss remains, whichever 
comes first. 
If any other the other insurance available to the additional insured(s) does not permit contribution by 
equal shares, we will contribute by limits. Under this method, each insurer's share is based on the 
ratio of its applicable limit of insurance to the total applicable limits of insurance of all insurers. 
NIAC-E61 02 19 Page 2 of 2 

POLICY NUMBER: 2019-18290 FORM: NIAC-E26 11 17 NAMED INSURED: Operation Hope-North County, Inc. 
A Head for Insurance. A Heart for Nonprofits. 
THIS ENDORSEMENT CHANGES THE POLICY. PLEASE READ IT CAREFULLY. 

WAIVER OF TRANSFER OF RIGHTS OF RECOVERY AGAINST OTHERS (WAIVER OF SUBROGATION) 
This endorsement modifies insurance provided under the following: 
COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY COVERAGE PART 
SOCIAL SERVICE PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY COVERAGE FORM 
. 
SCHEDULE 
I Name of Pe,son o, O,gan;.ation, Where you are so required in a written contract or agreement currently in effect or becoming effective during the 
term of this policy, we waive any right of recovery we may have against that person or organization, who may be 
named in the schedule above, because of payments we make for injury or damage. 
NIAC-E26 11 17 Page 1 of 1 

POLICY NUMBER: 2019-18290 FORM: NIAC-E25 12 15 
NAMED INSURED: Operation Hope-North County, Inc. 
A Head for Insurance. A Heart for Nonprofits. 
THIS ENDORSEMENT CHANGES THE POLICY. PLEASE READ IT CAREFULLY. 
ADDITIONAL INSURED -DESIGNATED PERSON OR ORGANIZATION 

FOOD CONTRIBUTIONS OR CLIENT REFERRALS 
This endorsement modifies insurance provided under the following: COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY COVERAGE PART 
SCHEDULE 
Name of Person or Organization: 
Any person or organization that you are required to add as an additional insured on this policy, under a written contract or agreement currently in effect, or becoming effective during the term of this policy, in consideration of food contributions or client referrals you receive from them. 
A. Section II -Who Is An Insured is amended to include as an additional insured the person(s) or organization(s) shown in the Schedule, but only with respect to liability for "bodily injury", "property damage" or "personal and advertising injury" caused, in whole or in part, by your acts or omissions or the acts or omissions of those acting on your behalf: 
1. 
In the performance of your ongoing operations; or 

2. 
In connection with your premises owned by or rented to you. 


However: 
1. 
The insurance afforded to such additional insured only applies to the extent permitted by law; and 

2. 
If coverage provided to the additional insured is required by a contract or agreement, the insurance afforded to such additional insured will not be broader than that which you are required by the contract or aQreement to provide for such additional insured. 


B. With respect to the insurance afforded to these additional insureds, the following is added to Section Ill ­Limits Of Insurance: 
If coverage provided to the additional insured is required by a contract or agreement, the most we will pay on behalf of the additional insured is the amount of insurance: 
1. 
Required by the contract or agreement; or 

2. 
Available under the applicable Limits of Insurance shown in the Declarations; whichever is less. This endorsement shall not increase the applicable Limits of Insurance shown in the Declarations. 


NIAC-E25 12 15 Page 1 of 1 
IL 02 70 09o12 
THIS ENDORSEMENT CHANGES THE POLICY. PLEASE READ IT CAREFULLY. 

CALIFORNIA CHANGES -CANCELLATION AND NONRENEWAL 
This endorsement modifies insurance provided under the following: 
CAPITAL ASSETS PROGRAM (OUTPUT POLICY) COVERAGE PART COMMERCIAL AUTOMOBILE COVERAGE PART COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY COVERAGE PART COMMERCIAL INLAND MARINE COVERAGE PART 
COMMERCIAL PROPERTY COVERAGE PART CRIME AND FIDELITY COVERAGE PART EMPLOYMENT-RELATED PRACTICES LIABILITY COVERAGE PART EQUIPMENT BREAKDOWN COVERAGE PART 
FARM COVERAGE PART 
LIQUOR LIABILITY COVERAGE PART 
MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY COVERAGE PART POLLUTION LIABILITY COVERAGE PART 
PRODUCTS/COMPLETED OPERATIONS LIABILITY COVERAGE PART 
A. Paragraphs 2. and 3. of the Cancellation 3. All Policies In Effect For More Than 60 Days Common Policy Condition are replaced by the 
a. If this policy has been in effect for more following: than 60 days, or is a renewal of a policy we 
2. All Policies In Effect For 60 Days Or Less issued, we may cancel this policy only upon the occurrence, after the effective date of
If this policy has been in effect for 60 days or the policy, of one or more of the following: 
less, and is not a renewal of a policy we have previously issued, we may cancel this policy by (1) Nonpayment of premium, including mailing or delivering to the first Named Insured, payment due on a prior policy we issued at the mailing address shown in the policy, and and due during the current policy term to the producer of record, advance written covering the same risks. notice of cancellation, stating the reason for 
(2) Discovery of fraud or materialcancellation, at least: misrepresentation by: 
a. 10 days before the effective date of (a) Any his or her
insured or cancellation if we cancel for: representative in obtaining this 
(1) 
Nonpayment of premium; or insurance; or 

(2) 
Discovery of fraud by: (b) You or your representative in pursuing a claim under this policy. 

(a) 
Any insured or his or her representative in obtaining this (3) A judgment by a court or an insurance; or administrative tribunal that you have 


violated a California or Federal law,
(b) You or your representative in having as one of its necessary elements pursuing a claim under this policy. 
an act which materially increases any of 
b. 30 days before the effective date of the risks insured against. 
cancellation if we cancel for any other reason. 
IL 02 70 09 12 © Insurance Services Office, Inc., 2012 Page 1 of 4 
POLICY NUMBER: COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY 2016--18290 
CG 20 26 04 13 
THIS ENDORSEMENT CHANGES THE POLICY. PLEASE READ IT CAREFULLY. 
ADDITIONAL INSURED -DESIGNATED PERSON OR ORGANIZATION 
This endorsement modifies insurance provided under the following: COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY COVERAGE PART 
SCHEDULE 
Name Of Additional Insured Person(s) Or Organization(s): 
Any person or organization that you are required to add as an additional insured on this policy, under a written contract or agreement currently in effect, or becoming effective during the term of this policy. The additional insured status will not be afforded with respect to liability arising out of or related to your activities as a real estate manager for that person or organization. 
Information required to complete this Schedule, if not shown above, will be shown in the Declarations. 
A.  Section II ­Who Is An Insured is amended to  B.  With respect to the insurance afforded to these  
include as an additional insured the person(s) or  additional insureds, the following is added to  
organization(s) shown in the Schedule, but only  Section Ill -Limits Of Insurance:  
with respect to liability for "bodily injury", "property  
damage" or "personal and advertising injury"  If coverage provided to the additional insured is  
caused, in whole or in part, by your acts or  required by a contract or agreement, the most we  
omissions or the acts or omissions of those acting  will pay on behalf of the additional insured is the  
on your behalf:  amount of insurance:  
1. In the performance of your ongoing operations;  1. Required by the contract or agreement; or  
or  2. Available under the applicable Limits of  
2. In connection with your premises owned by or  Insurance shown in the Declarations;  
rented to you.  whichever is less.  
However:  This endorsement shall not increase the  
1. The insurance afforded to such additional  applicable Limits of Insurance shown in the  
Insured only applies to the extent permitted by  Declarations.  
law; and  
2. If coverage provided to the additional insured is  
required by a contract or agreement, the  
insurance afforded to such additional insured  
will not be broader than that which you are  
required by the contract or agreement to  
provide for such additional insured.  

CG 20 26 04 13 © Insurance SeNices Office, Inc., 2012 Page 1 of 1 

A Head for Insurance. A Heart for Nonprofits. 
POLICY NUMBER: 2016-18290 
THIS ENDORSEMENT CHANGES THE POLICY. PLEASE READ IT CAREFULLY. 
ADDITIONAL INSURED 
PRIMARY AND NON-CONTRIBUTORY ENDORSEMENT FOR PUBLIC ENTITIES 
This endorsement modifies insurance provided under the following: 
COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY COVERAGE PART 
A. SECTION II -WHO IS AN INSURED is amended to include any public entity as an additional insured for whom you are performing operations when you and such person or organization have agreed in a written contract or written agreement that such public entity be added as an additional insured(s) on your policy, 
but only with respect to liability for "bodily injury", "property damage" or "personal and advertising injury" caused, in whole or in part, by: 
1. 
Your negligent acts or omissions; or 

2. 
The negligent acts or omissions of those acting on your behalf; in the performance of your ongoing operations. 


No such public entity is an additional insured for liability arising out of the "products-completed 
operations hazard" or for liability arising out of the sole negligence of that public entity. 
B. With respect to the insurance afforded to these additional insured(s), the following additional exclusions apply. 
This insurance does not apply to "bodily injury" or "property damage" occurring after: 
1. 
All work, including materials, parts or equipment furnished in connection with such work, on the project (other than service, maintenance or repairs) to be performed by or on behalf of the additional insured(s) at the location of the covered operations has been completed; or 

2. 
That portion of "your work" out of which injury or damage arises has been put to its intended use by any person or organization other than another contractor or subcontractor engaged in performing operations for a principal as a part of the same project. 


C. The following is added to SECTION Ill -LIMITS OF INSURANCE: 
The limits of insurance applicable to the additional insured(s) are those specified in the written contract between you and the additional insured(s), or the limits available under this policy, whichever are less. These limits are part of and not in addition to the limits of insurance under this policy. 
D. With respect to the insurance provided to the additional insured(s), Condition 4. Other Insurance of SECTION IV -COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY CONDITIONS is replaced by the following: 
4. Other Insurance 
a. Primary Insurance 
This insurance is primary if you have agreed in a written contract or written agreement: 
NIAC-E61 12 15 Page 1 of 2 
(1) 
That this insurance be primary. If other insurance is also primary, we will share with all that 

other insurance as described in c. below; or 

(2) 
The coverage afforded by this insurance is primary and non-contributory with the additional 


insured(s)' own insurance. 
Paragraphs (1) and (2} do not apply to other insurance to which the additional insured{s} has been added as an additional insured or to other insurance described in paragraph b. below. 
b. Excess Insurance 
This insurance is excess over: 
1. Any of the other insurance, whether primary, excess, contingent or on any other basis: 
(a} That is Fire, Extended Coverage, Builder's Risk, Installation Risk or similar coverage for "your work"; 
{b) That is fire, lightning, or explosion insurance for premises rented to you or temporarily occupied by you with permission of the owner; 
(c} That is insurance purchased by you to cover your liability as a tenant for "property damage" to premises temporarily occupied by you with permission of the owner; or 
(d) 
If the loss arises out of the maintenance or use of aircraft, "autos" or watercraft to the extent not subject to Exclusion g. of SECTION I -COVERAGE A-BODILY INJURY AND PROPERTY DAMAGE. 

(e) 
That is any other insurance available to an additional insured(s) under this Endorsement covering liability for damages arising out of the premises or operations, or products­completed operations, for which the additional insured(s) has been added as an additional insured by that other insurance. 


(1) When this insurance is excess, we will have no duty under Coverages A or B to defend the additional insured(s) against any "suit'' if any other insurer has a duty to defend the additional insured{s) against that "suit". If no other insurer defends, we will undertake to do so, but we will be entitled to the additional insured(s)' rights against all those other insurers. 
(2} When this insurance is excess over other insurance, we will pay only our share of the amount of the loss, if any, that exceeds the sum of: 
(a) 
The total amount that all such other insurance would pay for the loss in the absence of this insurance; and 

(b) 
The total of all deductible and self-insured amounts under all that other insurance. 


(3) We will share the remaining loss, if any, with any other insurance that is not described in this Excess Insurance provision and was not bought specifically to apply in excess of the Limits of Insurance shown in the Declarations of this Coverage Part. 
c. Methods of Sharing If all of the other insurance available to the additional insured(s) permits contribution by equal shares, we will follow this method also. Under this approach each insurer contributes equal amounts until it has paid its applicable limit of insurance or none of the loss remains, whichever comes first. 
If any other the other insurance available to the additional insured(s} does not permit contribution by equal shares, we will contribute by limits. Under this method, each insurer's share is based on the ratio of its applicable limit of insurance to the total applicable limits of insurance of all insurers. 
NIAC-E61 12 15 Page 2 of 2 
IL 02 70 09o12 
THIS ENDORSEMENT CHANGES THE POLICY. PLEASE READ IT CAREFULLY. 


CALIFORNIA CHANGES -CANCELLATION AND NONRENEWAL 
This endorsement modifies insurance provided under the following: 
CAPITAL ASSETS PROGRAM (OUTPUT POLICY) COVERAGE PART 
COMMERCIAL AUTOMOBILE COVERAGE PART 
COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY COVERAGE PART 
COMMERCIAL INLAND MARINE COVERAGE PART 
COMMERCIAL PROPERTY COVERAGE PART 
CRIME AND FIDELITY COVERAGE PART 
EMPLOYMENT-RELATED PRACTICES LIABILITY COVERAGE PART 
EQUIPMENT BREAKDOWN COVERAGE PART 
FARM COVERAGE PART 
LIQUOR LIABILITY COVERAGE PART 
MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY COVERAGE PART 
POLLUTION LIABILITY COVERAGE PART 
PRODUCTS/COMPLETED OPERATIONS LIABILITY COVERAGE PART 
A. Paragraphs 2. and 3. of the Cancellation 3. All Policies In Effect For More Than 60 Days Common Policy Condition are replaced by the 
a. If this policy has been in effect for more following: than 60 days, or is a renewal of a policy we 
2. All Policies In Effect For 60 Days Or Less issued, we may cancel this policy only upon the occurrence, after the effective date of
If this policy has been in effect for 60 days or the policy, of one or more of the following: less, and is not a renewal of a policy we have 
previously issued, we may cancel this policy by (1) Nonpayment of premium, including mailing or delivering to the first Named Insured, payment due on a prior policy we issued at the mailing address shown in the policy, and and due during the current policy term to the producer of record, advance written covering the same risks. notice of cancellation, stating the reason for of or material
(2) Discovery fraud cancellation, al least: misrepresentation by: 
a. 10 days before the effective date of (a) Any insured or his or her cancellation if we cancel for: representative in obtaining this 
(1) 
Nonpayment of premium; or insurance; or 

(2) 
Discovery of fraud by: (b) You or your representative in pursuing a claim under this policy. 

(a) 
Any insured or his or her 

representative in obtaining this (3) A judgment by a court or an insurance; or administrative tribunal that you have violated a California or Federal law,

(b) 
You or your representative in 


having as one of its necessary elements pursuing a claim under this policy. 
an act which materially increases any of 
b. 30 days before the effective date of the risks insured against. 
cancellation if we cancel for any other 
reason. 
IL 02 70 09 12 © Insurance Services Office, Inc., 2012 Page 1 of 4 





