AGREEMENT BETWEEN  
THE CITY OF DEL MAR AND SAN DIEGO REGIONAL TASK FORCE ON THE HOMELESS 
FOR COMMUNITY SUPPORT PROGRAM FUNDING 
FOR FISCAL YEARS 2021-2022 and 2022-2023 
 
 This Agreement is made and entered into this 1st day of July, 2021, by and between the City of Del Mar, a Charter City and a municipal corporation (“City”), and the San Diego Regional Task Force on the Homeless (RTFH) (collectively “Parties”). 
 
WHEREAS, the City desires to enter into an agreement with RTFH to provide services to Del Mar residents that address unmet community needs (“Services”).  Said work is to be performed in accordance with the terms and conditions set forth below and as described in the scope of services, attached hereto as Exhibit “A” and incorporated herein; and 
 
WHEREAS, the City has determined that RTFH is qualified by experience and ability to perform the services desired by City, and RTFH is willing to perform such services; and 
 
WHEREAS, RTFH will conduct all the work as described and detailed in this Agreement to be provided to the City. 
 
NOW, THEREFORE, the Parties hereto mutually covenant and agree with each other as follows: 
 
1. SERVICES. 
 
1.1 Scope of Services. RTFH shall perform the Services as set forth in the written Scope of Services, attached hereto as Exhibit “A” and incorporated herein.  Such services shall be provided at the direction of the City. 
   
1.2. City Modification of Scope of Services. City may order changes to the Scope of Services within the general scope of this Agreement consisting of additions, deletions, or other revisions. If such changes cause a change in the RTFH’s cost of, or time required for, completion of the Scope of Services, an equitable adjustment to RTFH’s compensation and/or contract time shall be made, subject to the City’s approval. All such changes shall be authorized in writing, executed by RTFH and City.  If such a change results in an extension of the term of this Agreement or increases the maximum amount to be paid under this Agreement, no such change shall have any force or effect unless an amendment to this Agreement is approved by the City Council. 
 
2. DURATION OF AGREEMENT. 
 
2.1  Term, Time for Performance.  This Agreement shall be effective for a two-year period beginning on July 1, 2021, and ending June 30, 2023.    
 
Time is of the essence for this Agreement and each provision of this Agreement, unless otherwise specified in this Agreement. 
 
2.2 Delay. Any delay occasioned by causes beyond the control of RTFH may merit an extension of time for the completion of the Scope of Services. When such delay occurs, 
RTFH shall immediately notify the Project Coordinator in writing of the cause and the extent of the delay, whereupon the Project Coordinator shall ascertain the facts and the extent of the delay and grant an extension of time for the completion of the Consulting Services when justified by the circumstances provided that no extension of time shall be granted which would extend the time for performance beyond the date specified in section 2.1 above. 
 
2.3 City’s Right to Terminate for Default. Should RTFH be in default of any covenant or condition hereof, City may immediately terminate this Agreement for cause if RTFH fails to cure the default within ten (10) calendar days of receiving written notice of the default. 2.4 City’s Right to Terminate without Cause. Without limiting its rights in the event of RTFH’s default, City may terminate this Agreement, without cause, by giving written notice to RTFH. Such termination shall be effective upon receipt of the written notice. RTFH shall be compensated for all effort and material expended on behalf of City under the terms of this Agreement, up to the effective date of termination.  All personal property remaining in City facilities or on City property thirty (30) days after the expiration or termination of this Agreement shall be, at City’s election, considered the property of City. 





 
 
3. PERFORMANCE AFTER TERMINATION.  Upon termination of this Agreement as provided herein, RTFH shall, within such reasonable time period as may be directed by City Manager, complete those items of work which are in various stages of completion and which City Manager determines are necessary to be completed by RTFH to allow the project to be completed in a timely, logical, and orderly manner.  Upon termination, all finished or unfinished documents, data, studies, surveys, drawings, models, photographs, reports, and other materials prepared by RTFH shall be delivered to the City Manager, upon her request, as property of City. 
 
4. COMPENSATION. 
 
4.1 Amount. Compensation to be provided to RTFH in the amount of $2,000 per year for both Fiscal Year (FY) 2021-2022 and FY 2022-2023, for a combined total of $4,000 from the City’s FY 2021-2023 Community Support Program. The City shall provide the compensation in one lump sum payment per year at the beginning of each fiscal year.   
 
4.2 Additional Services. City may, as the need arises or in the event of an emergency, request additional services of RTFH. Should such additional services be required, Compensation therefore shall be paid to the RTFH in accordance with Scope of Services contained in Exhibit “A.”  City and RTFH shall agree to the costs prior to commencement of such work.   
 
5. INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR.  RTFH is, for all purposes arising out of this Agreement, an independent contractor. The RTFH has and shall retain the right to exercise full control and supervision of all persons assisting the RTFH in the performance of said services hereunder, the City only being concerned with the finished results of the work being performed. Neither RTFH nor RTFH’s employees shall in any event be entitled to any benefits to which City employees are entitled, including, but not limited to, overtime, any retirement benefits, workers’ compensation benefits, any injury leave or other leave benefits, RTFH being solely responsible for all such matters, as well as, compliance with social security and income tax withholding and all other regulations and laws governing such matters. 
 
6. STATEMENT OF EXPERIENCE. RTFH agrees that it has the financial resources, service experience, completion ability, personnel, and experience in dealing with public agencies necessary for performing the Scope of Services and that such performance shall be in accordance with the standards customarily adhered to by an experienced and competent RTFH using the degree of care and skill ordinarily exercised by reputable RTFH’s practicing in the same field of service in the State of California. By executing this Agreement, RTFH represents that it has demonstrated trustworthiness and possesses the quality, fitness, and capacity to perform the Agreement in a manner satisfactory to City.  Additionally, RTFH and all of RTFH’s employees or agents shall secure and maintain in force such permits and licenses as are required by law in connection with the furnishing of services pursuant to this Agreement. 
 
7. AUDIT OF RECORDS.   
 
7.1 At any time during normal business hours and as often as may be deemed necessary, the RTFH shall make available to a representative of City for examination all of its records with respect to all matters covered by this Agreement and shall permit City to audit, examine, and/or reproduce such records. RTFH shall retain such financial and program service records for at least four (4) years after termination or final payment under this Agreement. 
 
7.2 The RTFH shall include the City’s right to audit under this section in any and all of their subcontracts, and shall ensure that these sections are binding upon all subcontractors. 
 
8. CONFIDENTIALITY.  All services performed by RTFH, including, but not limited to, all drafts, data, correspondence, proposals, reports, research and estimates compiled or composed by RTFH, pursuant to this Agreement, are for the sole use of the City, its agents and employees. Neither the documents nor their contents shall be released to any third party without the prior written consent of the City. This provision does not apply to information that (a) was publicly known, or otherwise known to RTFH, at the time that it was disclosed to RTFH by the City, (b) subsequently becomes publicly known through no act or omission of RTFH or (c) otherwise becomes known to RTFH other than through disclosure by the City. Except for any subcontractors that may be allowed upon prior agreement, neither the documents nor their contents shall be released to any third party without the prior written consent of the City. The sole purpose of this section is to prevent disclosure of City’s confidential and proprietary information by RTFH or subcontractors. 
 
9. CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.  
 
9.1 RTFH shall at all times comply with all federal, state and local conflict of interest laws, regulations, and policies applicable to public contracts and procurement practices, including, but not limited to, California Government Code §§ 81000 et seq. (Political Reform Act) and §§ 1090 et seq. RTFH shall immediately disqualify itself and shall not use its official position to influence in any way any matter coming before the City in which the RTFH has a financial interest as defined in Government Code § 87103. RTFH represents that it has no knowledge of any financial interests, which would require it to disqualify itself from any matter on which it might perform services for the City. 
 
10. OWNERSHIP OF DOCUMENTS.  All documents, data, studies, drawings, maps, models, photographs and reports prepared by RTFH under this Agreement shall be considered the property of City. RTFH shall be permitted to reference and use said materials for use in future 
studies, work, and marketing so long as said materials are considered “public documents” and are not subject to attorney-client privilege, or the subject of pending closed or executive session discussions. 
 
11. INSURANCE 
 
11.1 RTFH shall procure and maintain for the duration of the Agreement insurance against claims for injuries to persons or damages to property which may arise from or in connection with the performance of the work hereunder and the results of that work by the RTFH, their agents, representatives, employees or subcontractors. Insurance shall be placed with insurers with a current A.M. Best’s rating of no less than “A” and “VII” and are admitted to do business in the State of California, unless otherwise approved in writing by the City’s Risk Manager. 
 
11.2 RTFH’s liabilities, including but not limited to RTFH’s indemnity obligations, under this Agreement, shall not be deemed limited in any way to the insurance coverage required herein. All policies of insurance required hereunder must provide that the City is entitled to thirty (30) days prior written notice (ten (10) days for cancellation due to non-payment of premium) of cancellation or non-renewal of the policy or policies. Maintenance of specified insurance coverage is a material element of this Agreement. 
 
11.3 Types and Amounts Required.  RTFH shall maintain, at minimum, the following insurance coverage for the duration of this Agreement: 
 
11.3.1 Commercial General Liability (CGL).  Insurance written on an ISO Occurrence form CG 00 01 07 98 or equivalent providing coverage at least as broad which shall cover liability arising from any and all personal injury or property damage in the amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence and subject to an annual aggregate of $2,000,000. There shall be no endorsement or modification of the CGL limiting the scope of coverage for either insured vs. insured claims or contractual liability. All defense costs shall be outside the limits of the policy. 
 
11.3.2 Commercial Automobile Liability.  For all of the RTFH's automobiles including owned, hired and non-owned automobiles, automobile insurance written on an ISO form CA 00 01 12 90 or a later version of this form or an equivalent form providing coverage at least as broad for bodily injury and property damage for a combined single limit of $300,000 per occurrence. Insurance certificate shall reflect coverage for any automobile (any auto). 
 
11.3.3 Workers' Compensation.  For all of the RTFH's employees who are subject to this Agreement and to the extent required by applicable state or federal law, a Workers' Compensation policy providing at minimum $1,000,000 employers' liability coverage. The RTFH shall provide an endorsement that the insurer waives the right of subrogation against the City and its respective elected officials, officers, employees, agents and representatives. 
 
11.3.4 Social Services Professional Liability.  Social Services Professional Liability (errors and omissions) coverage with a limit of $1,000,000 per claim and $2,000,000 annual aggregate. The RTFH shall ensure both that (1) the policy retroactive date is on or before the date of commencement of the Scope of Services; and (2) the policy will be maintained in force for a period of three years after substantial completion of the Scope of Services or termination of this Agreement whichever occurs last. The RTFH agrees that for the 
time period defined above, there will be no changes or endorsements to the policy that increase the City's exposure to loss. All defense costs shall be outside the limits of the policy. 
 
11.4 Deductibles and Self-Insured Retentions.  Any deductibles or self-insured retentions are the responsibility of the RTFH and must be declared to and approved by the City.  At the option of the City, either (1) the insurer shall reduce or eliminate such deductibles or self-insured retentions as respects the City, its officers, officials, employees, and volunteers, or (2) the RTFH shall provide a financial guarantee satisfactory to the City guaranteeing payment of losses and related investigations, claim administration, and defense expenses. 
 
11.5 Additional Required Provisions.  The commercial general liability and automobile liability policies shall contain, or be endorsed to contain, the following provisions: 
 
11.5.1 The City, its officers, officials, employees, and representatives shall be named as additional insureds. The City's Additional Insured status must be reflected on additional insured endorsement form which shall be submitted to the City.  
 
11.5.2 The policies are primary and non-contributory to any insurance that may be carried by the City, as reflected in an endorsement which shall be submitted to the City. 
 
11.6 Verification of Coverage.  RTFH shall furnish the City with original certificates and amendatory endorsements effecting coverage required by this Section 11.  The endorsement should be on forms provided by the City or on other than the City’s forms provided those endorsements conform to City requirements. All certificates and endorsements are to be received and approved by the City before work commences.  The City reserves the right to require complete, certified copies of all required insurance policies, including endorsements affecting the coverage required by these specifications at any time. 
 
12. DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION.   
 
12.1 RTFH agrees to indemnify, defend (with attorneys approved by City), and hold harmless the City, and its officers, officials, agents and employees (the “Indemnified Parties”) from any and all claims, demands, costs or liability that arise out of, or pertain to, or relate to the RTFH, its employees, agents, and subcontractors performance of services under this Agreement.  RTFH’s duty to indemnify under this section shall not include liability for damages for death or bodily injury to persons, injury to property, or other loss, damage or expense arising from the sole negligence or willful misconduct by the City or its elected officials, officers, agents, and employees.  RTFH's indemnification obligations shall not be limited by the insurance provisions of this Agreement. The Parties expressly agree that any payment, attorney's fees, costs or expense City incurs or makes to or on behalf of an injured employee under the City's self-administered workers' compensation is included as a loss, expense, or cost for the purposes of this section, and that this section will survive the expiration or early termination of this Agreement. 
 
12.2 This indemnity is in addition to any other rights or remedies which City may have under the law or this Agreement.  In the event of any claim or demand made against any party which is entitled to be indemnified hereunder, City may, at its sole discretion, reserve, retain or apply any monies due to RTFH under this Agreement for the purpose of resolving such claims; provided however, that City may release such funds if RTFH provides City with reasonable assurances of protection of the City's interest.  The City shall, in its sole discretion determine whether such assurances are reasonable. 
 
12.3 RTFH agrees that its duty to defend arises upon an allegation of liability based upon the performance of services under this Agreement by RTFH, its officers, agents, representatives, employees, sub-RTFHs, or anyone for whom RTFH is liable and that an adjudication of RTFH’s liability is not a condition precedent to RTFH's duty to defend. 
 
13. SUBCONTRACTORS.  
 
13.1 The RTFH’s hiring or retaining of third parties (i.e. subcontractors) to perform services related to the Project is subject to prior approval by the City.  
 
13.2 All contracts entered into between the RTFH and its subcontractor shall also provide that each subcontractor shall obtain insurance policies, which shall be kept in full force and effect during any and all work on this Project and for the duration of this Agreement. The RTFH shall require the subcontractor to obtain all policies described in section 11 of this Agreement in the amounts required by the City, which shall not be greater than the amounts required of the RTFH.  
 
13.3 In any dispute between the RTFH and its subconsultants, the City shall not be made a party to any judicial or administrative proceeding to resolve the dispute. The RTFH agrees to defend and indemnify the City as described in section 12 of this Agreement should the City be made a party to any judicial or administrative proceeding to resolve any such dispute or should the City incur any costs in responding to third-party discovery requests. 
 
14. NON-DISCRIMINATION.  RTFH shall not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, physical or mental disability, medical condition, genetic information, marital status, military or veteran status, gender, gender identity, gender expression, sexual orientation, or any other class protected under state, federal, or local law. RTFH shall take affirmative action to insure that applicants are employed and that employees are treated during employment without regard to any class or category protected under state, federal, or local law and shall make reasonable accommodation to qualified individuals with disabilities. Such action shall include, but not be limited to, the following: employment, upgrading, demotion, transfer, recruitment, or recruitment advertising, layoff or termination, rates of pay or other forms of compensation, and selection for training, including apprenticeship. RTFH agrees to post in conspicuous places available to employees and applicants for employment any notices provided by City setting forth the provisions of this non-discrimination clause. 
 
15. NOTICES.  All communications to either party by the other party shall be delivered to the persons listed below. Any such written communications by mail shall be conclusively deemed to have been received by the addressee five (5) calendar days after the deposit thereof in the United States Mail, postage prepaid and properly addressed as noted below. 
 
 City of Del Mar    RTFH  
 City Clerk     Tamera Kohler, Chief Executive Officer
 1050 Camino del Mar    4699 Murphy Canyon Road 
 Del Mar, CA 92014    San Diego, CA  92123 
       
16 ASSIGNABILITY.  This Agreement and any portion thereof shall not be assigned or transferred, nor shall any of the RTFH’s duties be delegated or sub-contracted, without the express written consent of the City.  
 
17. RESPONSIBILITY FOR EQUIPMENT. City shall not be responsible nor held liable for any damage to persons or property consequent upon the use, misuse, or failure of any equipment used by RTFH or any of RTFH’s employees or subcontractors, even if such equipment has been furnished, rented, or loaned to RTFH by City. The acceptance or use of any such equipment by RTFH, RTFH’s employees, or subcontractors shall be construed to mean that RTFH accepts full responsibility for and agrees to exonerate, indemnify and hold harmless City from and against any and all claims for any damage whatsoever resulting from the use, misuse, or failure of such equipment. 
 
18. CALIFORNIA LAW; VENUE/MISC.  This Agreement shall be construed and interpreted according to the laws of the State of California. Any action brought to enforce or interpret any portion of this Agreement shall be brought in the county of San Diego, California. RTFH hereby waives any and all rights it might have pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure section 394.  
 
19. COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS.  The RTFH shall comply with all laws, ordinances, regulations, and policies of the federal, state, and local governments applicable to this Agreement, including California Labor Code section 1720, et seq., relating to payment of prevailing wages for public works projects, if applicable.  RTFH shall indemnify and defend the Indemnified Parties from and against any liability incurred due to any failure on the part of RTFH to comply with any applicable Laws. 
 
To the extent RTFH is required to comply with prevailing wage requirements, RTFH does hereby acknowledge that they are aware of, have read, and understand the terms and implications of SB 854 and RTFH and any subconsultants ensure that they are familiar with and comply with its requirements.  Such requirements include, but are not limited to, the registration requirement with the Department of Industrial Relations, State of California (DIR), pursuant to Labor Code section 1725.5.  As of March 1, 2015, in compliance with SB 854, the City requires all affected contractors and RTFHs to be registered with the DIR prior to submitting a bid or proposal on any eligible District project.  As of April 1, 2015, failure to comply with the requirements of SB 854 by any contractor or RTFH, including registration with the DIR pursuant to Labor Code section 1725.5, shall be a material breach of this Agreement which may be terminated by the City in its sole and absolute discretion.  Where applicable, this project is subject to compliance monitoring and enforcement by the DIR. 
 
20. RTFH’S CERTIFICATION OF AWARENESS OF IMMIGRATION REFORM AND CONTROL ACT OF 1986.  RTFH certifies that RTFH is aware of the requirements of the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 (8 USC §§ 1101-1525) and has complied and will comply with these requirements, including, but not limited to, verifying the eligibility for employment of all agents, employees, subcontractors, and RTFHs that are included in this Agreement. 
 
21. ENTIRE AGREEMENT.  This Agreement sets forth the entire understanding of the Parties with respect to the subject matters herein. There are no other understandings, terms or other agreements expressed or implied, oral or written, except as set forth herein.  
 
22. AMENDMENTS.  This Agreement may be modified or amended only by a written document executed by both RTFH and City and approved as to form by the City Attorney.  No change, alteration, or modification of the terms or conditions of this Agreement, and no verbal understanding of the Parties, their officers, agents, or employees shall be valid unless agreed to in writing by both Parties.  


 
23. NO WAIVER.  No failure of either the City or the RTFH to insist upon the strict performance by the other of any covenant, term or condition of this Agreement, nor any failure to exercise any right or remedy consequent upon a breach of any covenant, term, or condition of this Agreement shall constitute a waiver of any such breach of such covenant, term or condition. 


 
24. SEVERABILITY.  The unenforceability, invalidity, or illegality of any provision of this Agreement shall not render any other provision unenforceable, invalid, or illegal. 


 
25. DRAFTING AMBIGUITIES.  The Parties agree that they are aware that they have the right to be advised by counsel with respect to the negotiations, terms and conditions of this Agreement, and the decision of whether or not to seek advice of counsel with respect to this Agreement is a decision which is the sole responsibility of each Party. This Agreement shall not be construed in favor of or against either Party by reason of the extent to which each Party participated in the drafting of the Agreement. 


 
26. LEGAL FEES.  In the event of the bringing of any action or suit by either party hereto against the other party hereunder to enforce or interpret any of the provisions, covenants or conditions of this Agreement, or arising out of any tortuous conduct by either party incident to this Agreement, the prevailing party in such action or suit shall be entitled to recover all costs and expenses of suit, including reasonable attorneys' fees. In any action or suit brought to enforce this Agreement, the damages available shall be limited to specific performance or other such equitable relief that the court may order. 


 
27. CONFLICTS BETWEEN TERMS.  If an apparent conflict or inconsistency exists between the main body of this Agreement and the Exhibits, the main body of this Agreement shall control. If a conflict exists between an applicable federal, state, or local law, rule, regulation, order, or code and this Agreement, the law, rule, regulation, order, or code shall control. Varying degrees of stringency among the main body of this Agreement, the Exhibits, and laws, rules, regulations, orders, or codes are not deemed conflicts, and the most stringent requirement shall control. Each Party shall notify the other immediately upon the identification of any apparent conflict or inconsistency concerning this Agreement. 


 
28. EXHIBITS INCORPORATED.  All Exhibits referenced in this Agreement are incorporated into the Agreement by this reference. 


 
29. SIGNING AUTHORITY.  The representative for each Party signing on behalf of a corporation, partnership, joint venture, or governmental entity hereby declares that authority has been obtained to sign on behalf of the corporation, partnership, joint venture, or entity and agrees to hold the other Party or Parties hereto harmless if it is later determined that such authority does not exist. 


 
EXHIBIT “A” 
 
RTFH 
Community Support Program Funding 
 
Scope of Services 
FY 2021-2022 and 2022-2023 
 
 
The annual homeless Point-in-Time (PIT) count is federally mandated by the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) to count all persons experiencing homelessness both on the streets and in shelters on a single night in January. The grant funds to be provided by the City of Del Mar will be used to help facilitate the PIT count and provide incentives for homeless individuals to participate. 
 
 

