AGREEMENT
AN AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE CITY OF SANTEE, CALIFORNIA,
AND SANTEE FOOD BANK
FOR USE OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT FUNDS
FISCAL YEAR 2017-2018
THIS AGREEMENT is made by and between the City of Santee, a charter city organized and
operating under the laws of the State of California, hereinafter referred to as “Grantee,” and
Santee Food Bank, a non-profit organization (DUNS #962070889), hereinafter referred to as
“Subrecipient”
RECITALS
WHEREAS, the Grantee has applied for and received funds from the United States Government
under Title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, Public Law 93-383; and
WHEREAS, the Grantee wishes to engage the Subrecipient to assist the Grantee in utilizing
such funds;
AGREEMENT
NOW THEREFORE, IT IS AGREED AS FOLLOWS:
1. SERVICES
The Subrecipient will be responsible for administering an emergency food bank in a
manner satisfactory to the Grantee and consistent with any standards required as a
condition of providing these funds. Such program will include the following activities
eligible under the Community Development Block Grant Program:
A. Provide emergency food supplies for low and moderate income residents of
Santee.
B. Subrecipient warrants that it has the expertise and experience to perform the
work set forth in this Agreement and that it shall perform said work pursuant to
this Agreement and as stated in the Statement of Work, attached hereto as
Exhibit “A” incorporated herein by reference.
C. Subrecipient shall document performance on a quarterly basis by submittal of a
Quarterly Report, attached hereto as Exhibit “B” incorporated herein by
reference.
The Subrecipient certifies that the activities carried out with funds provided under this
Agreement will meet one or more of the CDBG program’s National Objectives, which
include: 1) benefit low/moderate income persons, 2) aid in the prevention or elimination
of slums or blight, 3) meet community development needs having a particular urgency -
as defined in 24 CFR 570.208.
The Grantee will monitor the performance of the Subrecipient against goals and
performance standards required herein. Substandard performance as determined by
the Grantee will constitute non-compliance with this Agreement. If action to correct such
substandard performance is not taken by the Subrecipient within a reasonable period of
time after being notified by the Grantee, contract suspension or termination procedures
will be initiated.
2. TERM OF AGREEMENT AND TIME OF PERFORMANCE
Services of the Subrecipient shall start on the 1st day of July 2017 and end on the 30th
day of June 2018. The term of this Agreement and the provisions herein shall be
extended to cover any additional time period during which the Subrecipient remains in
control of CDBG funds or other assets, including program income.
3. BUDGET
CATEGORY AMOUNT
Program Administration $ 14,470
TOTAL EXPENSES $ 14,470
Any indirect costs charged must be consistent with the conditions of Paragraph 9 (C) (ii)
of this Agreement. In addition, the Grantee may require a more detailed budget
breakdown than the one contained herein, and the Subrecipient shall provide such
supplementary budget information in a timely fashion in the form and content prescribed
by the Grantee. Any amendments to this budget must be approved in writing by the
Grantee and the Subrecipient.
4. PAYMENT
It is expressly agreed and understood that the total amount to be paid by the Grantee
under this contract shall not exceed $14,470. Drawdowns for the payment of eligible
expenses shall be made against the line item budgets specified in Paragraph 3 herein
and in accordance with performance. Expenses for general administration shall also be
paid against the line item budgets specified in Paragraph 3 and in accordance with
performance. Payments may be contingent upon certification of the Subrecipient’s
financial management system in accordance with the standards specified in 2 CFR
200.302.
Grantee shall issue payment on a reimbursement basis no more than once per calendar
month upon receipt of a completed Request for Reimbursement Report. Copies of the
Request for Reimbursement Report forms shall be provided by Grantee. The Request
for Reimbursement Report shall identify program expenditures for the period to be
reimbursed as follows:
1. Date of expenditure;
2. Payee;
3. Purpose of expenditure; and
4. Amount of expenditure.
Copies of supporting documentation must be attached; i.e., receipts, paid invoices, etc.
Direct salaries and wages, operational expenditures or other cost objective(s) which are
chargeable to more than one program must be supported by distribution records.
Approved invoices will be paid within 30 days of the date received by the Finance
Department.
2 of 18
5. NOTICES
Communication and details concerning this contract shall be directed to the following
contract representatives:
Grantee Subrecilient
City of Santee Santee Food Bank
CDBG Program Administrator Rev. Dennis Martins, Food Bank Administrator
10601 Magnolia Avenue P.O. Box 712054
Santee, CA 92071-1266 Santee, CA 92072
(619) 258-4100 (619) 448-5950
Fax (619) 562-9376 Fax: Fax: (619) 448-2096
6. GENERAL CONDITIONS
A. General Compliance
The subrecipient agrees to comply with the requirements of Title 24 of the Code
of Federal Regulations, Part 570 concerning Community Development Block
Grants (CDBG). The Subrecipient also agrees to comply with all other applicable
Federal, state and local laws, regulations, and policies governing the funds
provided under this contract. The Subrecipient further agrees to utilize funds
available under this Agreement to supplement rather than supplant funds
otherwise available.
B. “lndejendent Contractor”
Nothing contained in this Agreement is intended to, or shall be construed in any
manner, as creating or establishing the relationship of employer/employee
between the parties. The Subrecipient shall at all times remain an “independent
contractor” with respect to the services to be performed under this Agreement.
The Grantee shall be exempt from payment of all Unemployment Compensation,
FICA, retirement, life and/or medical insurance and Workers’ Compensation
Insurance as the Subrecipient is an independent subrecipient.
C. Grantor Recognition
The Subrecipient shall insure recognition of the role of the grantor agency in
providing services through this contract. All activities, facilities and items utilized
pursuant to this contract shall be prominently labeled as to funding source. In
addition, the Subrecipient will include a reference to the support provided herein
in all publications made possible with funds made available under this contract.
D. Amendments
The Grantee or Subrecipient may amend this Agreement at any time provided
that such amendments make specific reference to this Agreement, and are
executed in writing, signed by a duly authorized representative of organizations,
and approved by the Grantee’s governing body. Such amendments shall not
3 of 18
invalidate this Agreement, nor relieve or release the Grantee or Subrecipient
from its obligations under this Agreement.
The Grantee may, in its discretion, amend this Agreement to conform with
Federal, state or local governmental guidelines, policies and available funding
amounts, or for other reasons. If such amendments result in a change in the
funding, the scope of services, or schedule of the activities to be undertaken as
part of this Agreement, such modifications will be incorporated only by written
amendment signed by both Grantee and Subrecipient.
E. Suspension or Termination
Either party may terminate this contract at any time by giving written notice to the
other party of such termination and specifying the effective date thereof at least
30 days before the effective date of such termination. Partial terminations of the
Scope of Service in Paragraph 1 .A above may only be undertaken with the prior
approval of the Grantee. In the event of any termination for convenience, all
finished or unfinished documents, data, studies, surveys, maps, models,
photographs, reports or other materials prepared by the Subrecipient under this
Agreement shall, at the option of the Grantee, become the property of the
Grantee, and the Subrecipient shall be entitled to receive just and equitable
compensation for any satisfactory work within the Scope of Service completed
prior to the effective date of termination, and for which compensation has not
been received, within 30 days of submission of evidence satisfactory to Grantee
of completion thereof.
The Grantee may also suspend or terminate this Agreement, in whole or in part,
if the Subrecipient materially fails to comply with any term of this Agreement, or
with any of the rules, regulations or provisions referred to herein; and the
Grantee may declare the Subrecipient ineligible for any further participation in the
Grantee’s contracts, in addition to other remedies as provided by law.
7. INDEMNIFICATION
A. Subrecipient shall hold harmless, defend and indemnify the Grantee from any
loss, damage or attorney fees incurred because of any claim by any person or
entity, including the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development,
that Subrecipient has failed to meet federal reguirements.
B. To the fullest extent permitted by law, Subrecipient agrees to indemnify, defend
(with independent counsel approved by the Grantee) and hold harmless the
Grantee and its officers, employees and elected and appointed officials, and
volunteers (each, an “Indemnified Party”) from and against any and all liabilities
(including without limitation all claims, losses, damages, penalties, fines, and
judgments, associated investigation and administrative expenses, and defense
costs, including but not limited to reasonable attorneys’ fees, court costs and
costs of alternative dispute resolution) regardless of nature or type, expressly
including but not limited to those arising from bodily injury (including death) or
property damage, arising out of or resulting from any act or omission to act of the
Subrecipient, Subrecipient’s agents, officers, employees, contractors, or
independent consultants hired by Subrecipient under this Agreement. The
Subrecipient’s obligations apply regardless of whether or not a liability is caused
4 of 18
or contributed to by the negligence (including passive negligence) or other act or
omission of an Indemnified Party. The acceptance or approval of the
Subrecipient’s work by an Indemnified Party shall not relieve or reduce the
Subrecipient’s indemnification obligation. Subrecipient shall pay and satisfy any
judgment, award or decree that may be rendered against the Grantee, its
officials, officers, agents, employees or representatives. The provisions of this
Section shall survive completion of the work under this Agreement or the
termination of this Agreement and are not limited by the provisions relating to
insurance.
C. Should it become necessary for Grantee to commence suit to enforce any of the
terms and conditions of this Agreement, the prevailing party will be awarded any
and all reasonable attorney fees and court costs incurred in litigation.
8. INSURANCE
A. Commercial General Liability
(i) The Subrecipient shall take out and maintain, during the performance of
all work under this Agreement, in amounts not less than specified herein,
Commercial General Liability Insurance, in a form and with insurance
companies acceptable to the Grantee.
(ii) Coverage for Commercial General Liability insurance shall be at least as
broad as the following:
(a) Insurance Services Office Commercial General Liability coverage
(Occurrence Form CG 0001)
(iii) Commercial General Liability Insurance must include coverage for the
following:
(a) Bodily Injury (including death) and Property Damage
(b) Personal Injury/Advertising Injury
(c) Premises/Operations Liability
(d) Products/Completed Operations Liability
(e) Aggregate Limits that Apply per Project
(f) Explosion, Collapse and Underground (UCX) exclusion deleted
(g) Contractual Liability with respect to this Contract
(h) Broad Form Property Damage
(i) Independent Subrecipient’s Coverage
5 of 18
(iv) All such policies shall name the City of Santee, its City Council and each
member thereof, its officers, employees, and agents as Additional
Insureds under the policy.
(v) The general liability program may utilize either deductibles or provide
coverage excess of a self-insured retention, subject to written approval by
the Grantee. All deductibles and self-insured retentions must be declared
to the Grantee prior to commencing work under this Agreement.
B. Automobile Liability
(i) At all times during the performance of the work under this Agreement the
Subrecipient shall maintain Automobile Liability Insurance for bodily injury
(including death) and property damage including coverage for owned,
non-owned and hired vehicles, in a form and with insurance companies
acceptable to the Grantee.
(ii) Coverage for automobile liability insurance shall be at least as broad as
Insurance Services Office Form Number CA 0001 (ed. 6/92) covering
automobile liability, Code 1 (any auto).
(iii) The automobile liability program may utilize deductibles, but not a selfinsured
retention, subject to written approval by the Grantee.
C. Workers’ Compensation/Employer’s Liability
(i) At all times during the performance of the work under this Agreement the
Subrecipient shall maintain workers’ compensation in compliance with
applicable statutory requirements and Employer’s Liability Coverage in
amounts indicated herein. Such insurance shall include an insurer’s
Waiver of Subrogation in favor of the Grantee and will be in a form and
with insurance companies acceptable to the Grantee.
(ii) If insurance is maintained, the workers’ compensation and employer’s
liability program may utilize either deductibles or provide coverage excess
of a self-insured retention, subject to written approval by the Grantee.
(iii) Before beginning work, the Subrecipient shall furnish to the Grantee
satisfactory proof that he/she has taken out for the period covered by the
work under this Agreement, full compensation insurance for all persons
employed directly by him/her to carry out the work contemplated under.
this Agreement, all in accordance with the “Workers’ Compensation and
Insurance Act,” Division IV of the Labor Code of the State of California
and any acts amendatory thereof. Subrecipient shall require all
contractors to obtain and maintain, for the period covered by the work
under this Agreement, worker’s compensation of the same type and limits
as specified in this Section.
6 of 18
D. Minimum Policy Limits Required.
(I) The following insurance limits are required for the Contract:
Combined Single Limit
Commercial General Liability $2,000,000 per occurrencel$4,000,000
aggregate for bodily injury (including death),
personal injury and property damage
Automobile Liability $1,000,000 per occurrence for bodily injury
(including death) and property damage
Employer’s Liability $1,000,000 per occurrence
E. Evidence Required.
(i) Prior to execution of the Agreement, the Subrecipient shall file with the
Grantee evidence of insurance from an insurer or insurers certifying to the
coverage of all insurance required herein. Such evidence shall include
original copies of the ISO CG 2010 (or insurer’s equivalent) signed by the
insurer’s representative, Certificate of Insurance (most recent version of
Acord 25 Form or equivalent), and Additional Insured Endorsement
verifying compliance with the requirements above. All evidence of
insurance shall be signed by a properly authorized officer, agent or
qualified representative of the insurer and shall certify the names of the
insured, any additional primary insureds, where appropriate, the type and
amount of the insurance, the location and operations to which the
insurance applies, and the expiration date of such insurance.
F. Policy Provisions Required.
(i) The Grantee, its City Council and each member thereof, its officers,
employees, and agents shall be named as an additional insured on the
Commercial General Liability policy using form 2010 1185 or equivalent.
Any contractor or similar entity performing work on the Project must add
the Grantee as an additional insured using CG form 20 38, or broader
coverage. Blanket endorsements may be accepted at Grantee’s
discretion. All policies shall contain or shall be endorsed to contain a
provision that advanced written notice of any cancellation, including
cancellation for non-payment of premium, shall be provided to the
Grantee. Statements that the carrier “will endeavor” and “that failure to
mail such notice shall impose no obligation and liability upon the
company, its agents or representatives,” will not be acceptable on
endorsements. At the Grantee’s sole discretion, the requirement to
endorse policies to provide advanced written notice of cancellation to the
Grantee may be waived upon the Subrecipient’s agreement that it shall
provide the Grantee with copies of any notices of cancellation
immediately upon receipt.
(ii) General Liability and Automobile Liability insurance policies shall contain
a provision stating that the Subrecipient’s policies are primary insurance
7 of 18
and that the insurance of the Grantee or any named additional insureds
shall not be called upon to contribute to any loss.
G. Qualifying Insurers.
(i) All policies required shall be issued by acceptable insurance companies,
as determined by the Grantee, which satisfy the following minimum
requirements:
Insurance carriers shall be qualified to do business in California and
maintain an agent for process within the State. Such insurance carrier
shall have not less than an ‘A’ policyholder’s rating and a financial rating
of not less than “Class VII” according to the latest Best Key Rating Guide.
Due to market fluctuations in the Workers Compensation sector, the
Grantee reserves the right and at its sole discretion to review and accept
the Subrecipient’s proposed Workers compensation insurance.
H. Additional Insurance Provisions
(i) The foregoing requirements as to the types and limits of insurance
coverage to be maintained by Subrecipient, and any approval of said
insurance by the Grantee, is not intended to and shall not in any manner
limit or qualify the liabilities and obligations otherwise assumed by the
Subrecipient pursuant to this Agreement, including but not limited to, the
provisions concerning indemnification.
(ii) If at any time during the life of the Agreement, the Subrecipient fails to
maintain in full force any insurance required by the Agreement documents
the Grantee may terminate the Agreement or may elect to withhold
compensation in an amount sufficient to purchase insurance to replace
any expired or insufficient coverage.
(iii) The Subrecipient shall include all contractors as insureds under its
policies or shall furnish separate certificates and endorsements for each
contractor. All coverage for contractors shall be subject to all of the
requirements stated herein.
(iv) The Grantee may require the Subrecipient to provide complete copies of.
all insurance policies in effect for the duration of the Project.
(v) Neither the Grantee, nor its City Council, nor any member of thereof, nor
any of the directors, officers, employees, agents or volunteers shall be
personally responsible for any liability arising under or by virtue of the
Contract.
9. ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS
A. Financial Management
(i) Accounting Standards
The Subrecipient agrees to comply with the Uniform Administrative
Requirements, Cost Principles and Audit Requirements for Federal
Awards at 2 CFR Part 200 and agrees to adhere to the accounting
8 of 18
principles and procedures required therein, utilize adequate internal
controls, and maintain necessary source documentation for all costs
incurred. (24 CFR 570.502.)
(ii) Cost Principles
The Subrecipient shall administer its program in conformance with 2 CFR
200, Subpart E — Cost Principles. These principles shall be applied for all
costs incurred whether charged on a direct or indirect basis. (See 2 CFR
200.412-415.)
B. Documentation and Record-Keeping
(i) Records to be Maintained
The Subrecipient shall maintain all records requited by the Federal
regulations specified in 24 CFR 570.506 that are pertinent to the activities
to be funded under this Agreement. Such records shall include but not be
limited to:
(a) Records providing a full description of each activity undertaken;
(b) Records demonstrating that each activity undertaken meets one of
the National Objectives of the CDBG program;
(c) Records required tp determine the eligibility of activities;
(d) Records required to document the acquisition, improvement, use
or disposition of real property acquired or improved with CDBG
assistance;
(e) Records documenting compliance with the fair housing and equal
opportunity components of the CDBG program;
(f) Financial records as required by 24 CFR 570.502; and
(g) Other records necessary to document compliance with Subpart K
of 24 CFR 570.
(ii) Retention
The Subrecipient shall retain all records pertinent to expenditures
incurred under this contract for a period of five (5) years after the
termination of all activities funded under this Agreement. Records for
non-expendable property acquired with funds under this contract shall be
retained for five (5) years after final disposition of such property. Records
for any displaced person must be kept for five (5) years after he/she has
received final payment. Notwithstanding the above, if there is litigation,
claims, audits, negotiations or other actions that involve any of the
records cited and that have started before the expiration of the five-year
period, then such records must be retained until completion of the action
and resolution of all issues, or the expiration of the five-year period,
whichever occurs later.
9 of 18
(iii) Client Data
The Subrecipient shall maintain client data demonstrating client eligibility
for services provided. Such data shall include, but not be limited to, client
name, address, income level or other basis for determining eligibility, and
description of service provided. Such information shall be made available
to Grantee monitors or their designees for review upon request.
(iv) Disclosure
The Subrecipient understands that client information collected under this
contract is private and the use or disclosure of such information, when not
directly connected with the administration of the Grantee’s or
Subrecipient’s responsibilities with respect to services provided under this
contract, is prohibited by the State of California unless written consent is
obtained from such person receiving service and, in the case of a minor,
that of a responsible parent/guardian.
(v) Property Records
The Subrecipient shall maintain teal property inventory records which
clearly identify properties purchased, improved or sold using grant funds.
Properties retained shall continue to meet eligibility criteria and shall
conform with the “changes in use” restrictions specified in 24 CFR Part
570.503(b)(7), as applicable.
(vi) Close-Outs
The Subrecipient’s obligation to the Grantee shall not end until all close
out requirements are completed. Activities during this close-out period
shall include, but are not limited to: making final payments, disposing of
program assets (including the return of all unused materials, equipment,
unspent cash advances, program income balances, and accounts
receivable to the Grantee), and determining the custodianship of records.
(vii) Audits & Inspections
All Subrecipient records with respect to any matters covered by this
Agreement shall be made available to the Grantee, grantor agency, their
designees or the Federal Government, at any time during normal
business hours, as often as the Grantee or grantor agency deems
necessary, to audit, examine, and make excerpts or transcripts of all
relevant data. Any deficiencies noted in audit reports must be fully
cleared by the Subrecipient within 30 days after receipt by the
Subrecipient. Failure of the Subrecipient to comply with the above audit
requirements will constitute a violation of this contract and may result in
the withholding of future payments. The Subrecipient hereby agrees to
have an annual agency audit conducted in accordance with current
Grantee policy concerning subrecipient audits and, as applicable, 2 CFR
200, Subpart F, “Audit Requirements.”
10 of 18
C. Reporting and Payment Procedures
(i) Program Income
The Subrecipient shall report quarterly all program income as defined at
24 CFR 570.500(a) generated by activities carried out with CDBG funds
made available under this contract. The use of program income by the
Subrecipient shall comply with the requirements set forth at 24 CFR
570.504. By way of further limitations, the Subrecipient may use such
income during the contract period for activities permitted under this
contract and shall reduce requests for additional funds by the amount of
any such program income balances on hand. All unused program income
shall be returned to the Grantee at the end of the contract period. Any
interest earned on cash advances from the U.S. Treasury is not program
income and shall be remitted promptly to the Grantee.
(ii) Indirect Costs
If indirect costs are charged, the Subrecipient will develop an indirect cost
allocation plan for determining the appropriate Subrecipient’s share of
administrative costs and shall submit such plan to the Grantee for
approval, in a form specified by the Grantee.
(iii) Payment Procedures
The Grantee will pay to the Subrecipient funds available under this
contract based upon information submitted by the Subrecipient and
consistent with any approved budget and Grantee policy concerning
payments. With the exception of certain advances, payments will be
made for eligible expenses actually incurred by the Subrecipient, and not
to exceed actual cash requirements.
(iv) Progress Reports
The Subrecipient shall submit regular Progress Reports to the Grantee in
the form, content, and frequency as required by the Grantee.
Subrecipient acknowledges that reports, information, and other
documents and records submitted to Grantee may become public records
subject to disclosure pursuant to the California Public Records Act,
California Government Code Section 6250 et seq.
D. Procurement
(i) Compliance
The Subrecipient shall comply with current Grantee policy concerning the
purchase of equipment and shall maintain inventory records of all non
expendable personal property as defined by such policy as may be
procured with funds provided herein. All program assets (unexpended
program income, property, equipment, etc.) shall revert to the Grantee
upon termination of this contract.
11 of 18
(ii) 0MB Standards
The Subrecipient shall procure all materials, property, or services in
accordance with the requirements of 2 CFR 200.317-326, “Procurement
Standards,” as applicable, and shall subsequently follow the requirements
of 2 CFR 200.310-316, “Property Standards,” covering utilization and
disposal of property. (24 CFR 570.502.)
(iii) Travel
The Subrecipient shall obtain written approval from the Grantee for any
travel outside the metropolitan area with funds provided under this.
contract.
JO. RELOCATION, REAL PROPERTY ACQUISITION AND ONE-FOR-ONE HOUSING
REPLACEMENT
The Subrecipient agrees to comply with (a) the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real
Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970, as amended (URA), and implementing
regulations at 49 CFR Part 24 and 24 CFR 570.606(b); (b) the requirements of 24 CFR
570.606(c) governing the Residential Antidisplacement and Relocation Assistance Plan
under 24 CFR Part 42, Subpart B; and (c) the requirements in § 570.606(d) governing
optional relocation policies. [The Grantee may preempt the optional policies.] The
Subrecipient shall provide relocation assistance to persons (families, individuals,
businesses, nonprofit organizations and farms) that are displaced as a direct result of
acquisition, rehabilitation, demolition or conversion for a CDBG-assisted project. The
Subrecipient also agrees to comply with applicable Grantee ordinances, resolutions and
policies concerning the displacement of persons from their residences.
11. PERSONNEL & PARTICIPANT CONDITIONS
A. Civil Rights
(i) Compliance
The Subrecipient agrees to comply with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of
1964 as amended, Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968 as amended,
Section 104(b) and Section 109 of Title I of the Housing and Community
Development Act of 1974 as amended, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation
Act of 1973, the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, the Age
Discrimination Act of 1975, Executive Order 11246 as amended by
Executive Orders 11375,12086, and 13672.
(ii) Nondiscrimination
The Subrecipient will not discriminate against any employee or applicant
for employment because of race, color, creed, religion, ancestry, national
origin, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, disability or other
handicap, age, marital/familial status, or status with regard to public
assistance. The Subrecipient will take affirmative action to insure that all
employment practices are free from such discrimination. Such
employment practices include but are not limited to the following: hiring,
upgrading, demotion, transfer, recruitment or recruitment advertising,
12 of 18
layoff, termination, rates of pay or other forms of compensation, and
selection for training, including apprenticeship. The Subrecipient agrees
to post in conspicuous places, available to employees and applicants for
employment, notices to be provided by the contracting agency setting
forth the provisions of this nondiscrimination clause.
(iii) Land Covenants
This contract is subject to the requirements of Title VI of the Civil Rights
Act of 1964 (P.L. 88-352) and 24 CFR 570.601 and 602. In regard to the
sale, lease, or other transfer of land acquired, cleared or improved with
assistance provided under this contract, the Subrecipient shall cause or
require a covenant running with the land to be inserted in the deed or
lease for such transfer, prohibiting discrimination as herein defined, in the
sale, lease or rental, or in the use or occupancy of such land, or in any
improvements erected or to be erected thereon, providing that the
Grantee and the United States are beneficiaries of and entitled to enforce
such covenants. The Subrecipient, in undertaking its obligation to carry
out the program assisted hereunder, agrees to take such measures as
are necessary to enforce such covenant, and will not itself so
discriminate.
(iv) Section 504
The Subrecipient agrees to comply with any Federal regulations issued
pursuant to compliance with Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
(29 U.S.C. 794), which prohibits discrimination against the handicapped
in any Federally assisted program. The Grantee shall provide the
Subrecipient with any guidelines necessary for compliance with that
portion of the regulations in force during the term of this contract.
B. Affirmative Action
(i) Approved Plan
The Subrecipient agrees that it shall be committed to carry out pursuant
to the Grantee’s specifications an Affirmative Action Program in keeping
with the principles as provided in President’s Executive Order 11246 of
September 24, 1965.
(ii) Women and Minority Owned Businesses (W/MBE)
The Subrecipient will use its best efforts to afford minority- and womenowned
business enterprises the maximum practicable opportunity to
participate in the performance of this contract. As used in this contract,
the term “minority and female business enterprise” means a business at
least fifty-one (51) percent owned and controlled by minority group
members or women. For the purpose of this definition, “minority group
members” are Afro-Americans, Spanish-speaking, Spanish surnamed or
Spanish-heritage Americans, Asian-Americans, and American Indians.
The Subrecipient may rely on written representations by businesses
regarding their status as minority and female business enterprises in lieu
of an independent investigation.
13 of 18
(iii) Access to Records
The Subrecipient shall furnish and cause each of its own subrecipients or
subcontractors to furnish all information and reports required hereunder
and will permit access to its books, records and accounts by the Grantee,
HUD or its agent, or other authorized Federal officials for purposes of
investigation to ascertain compliance with the rules, regulations and
provisions stated herein.
(iv) Notifications
The Subrecipient will send to each labor union or representative of
workers with which it has a collective bargaining agreement or other
contract or understanding, a notice, to be provided by the agency
contracting officer, advising the labor union or worker’s representative of
the Subrecipient’s commitments hereunder, and shall post copies of the
notice in conspicuous places available to employees and applicants for
employment.
(v) Equal Employment Opportunity and Affirmative Action
The Subrecipient will, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees
placed by or on behalf of the Subrecipient, state that it is an Equal
Opportunity or Affirmative Action employer.
(vi) Subcontract Provisions
The Subrecipient will include the provisions of Paragraph A (Civil Rights)
and Paragraph B (Affirmative Action) in every subcontract or purchase
order, specifically or by reference, so that such provisions will be binding
upon each of its own subrecipients or subcontractors.
(vii) Compliance with Section 3
The Subrecipient shall comply with Section 3 of the Housing and Urban
Development Act of 1968, as amended, 12 U.S.C. 1701u (section 3) as
described in Exhibit C. In the event of an express conflict between any
term of Exhibit C and any other term of this Agreement, the conflicting
term of Exhibit C shall prevail.
C. Employment Restrictions
(i) Prohibited Activity
The Subrecipient is prohibited from using funds provided herein or
personnel employed in the administration of the program for: political
activities; sectarian or religious activities; lobbying, political patronage,
and nepotism activities.
14 of 18
D. Conduct
(i) Assignability
The Subrecipient shall not assign or transfer any interest in this contract
without the prior written consent of the Grantee thereto; provided,
however, that claims for money due or to become due to the Subrecipient
from the Grantee under this contract may be assigned to a bank, trust
company, or other financial institution without such approval. Notice of
any such assignment or transfer shall be furnished promptly to the
Grantee.
(ii) Subcontracts
(a) Approvals
The Subrecipient shall not enter into any subcontracts with any
agency or individual in the performance of this contract without the
written consent of the Grantee prior to the execution of such
agreement.
(b) Monitoring
The Subrecipient will monitor all subcontracted services on a
regular basis to assure contract compliance. Results of
monitoring efforts shall be summarized in written reports and
supported with documented evidence of follow-up actions taken to
correct areas of noncompliance.
(c) Content
The Subrecipient shall cause all of the provisions of this contract
in its entirety to be included in and made a part of any subcontract
executed in the performance of this Agreement.
(d) Selection Process
The Subrecipient shall undertake to insure that all subcontracts let
in the performance of this Agreement shall be awarded on a fair
and open competition basis. Executed copies of all subcontracts
shall be forwarded to the Grantee along with documentation
concerning the selection process.
(iii) Hatch Act
The Subrecipient agrees that no funds provided, nor personnel employed
under this contract, shall be in any way or to any extent engaged in the
conduct of political activities in violation of Chapter 15 of Title V United
States Code.
(iv) Conflict of Interest
The Subrecipient agrees to abide by the provisions of 24 CER 570.61 1
with respect to conflicts of interest, and covenants that it presently has no
financial interest and shall not acquire any financial interest, direct or
indirect, which would conflict in any manner or degree with the
performance of services required under this Agreement. The
15 of 18
Subrecipient further covenants that in the performance of this Agreement
no person having such a financial interest shall be employed or retained
by the Subrecipient hereunder. These conflict of interest provisions apply
to any person who is an employee, agent, consultant, officer, or elected
official or appointed official of the Grantee, or of any designated public
agencies or subrecipients which are receiving funds under the CDBG
Entitlement program.
(v) Lobbying
The Subrecipient hereby certifies that:
(a) No Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid, by
or on behalf of it, to any person for influencing or attempting to
influence an officer or employee of any agency, a Member of
Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of
a Member of Congress in connection with the awarding of any
Federal contract, the making of any Federal grant, the making of
any Federal loan, the entering into of any cooperative agreement,
and the extension, continuation, renewal, amendment, or
modification of any Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative
agreement;
(b) If any funds other than Federal appropriated funds have been paid
or will be paid to any person for influencing or attempting to
influence an officer or employee of any agency, a Member of
Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of
a Member of Congress in connection with this Federal contract,
grant, loan, or cooperative agreement, it will complete and submit
Standard Form-LLL, “Disclosure Form to Report Lobbying,” in
accordance with its instructions;
(c) It will require that the language of paragraph (d) of this certification
be included in the award documents for all subawards at all tiers
(including subcontracts, subgrants, and contracts under grants,
loans, and cooperative agreements) and that all subrecipients
shall certify and disclose accordingly; and
(d) Lobbying Certification
This certification is a material representation of fact upon which
reliance was placed when this transaction was made or entered
into. Submission of this certification is a prerequisite for making or
entering into this transaction imposed by Section 1352, Title 31,
U.S. Code. Any person who fails to file the required certification
shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $10,000 and not
more than $100,000 for each such failure.
(vi) Copyright
If this contract results in any copyrightable material or inventions, the
Grantee and/or grantor agency reserves the right to royalty-free, non
exclusive and irrevocable license to reproduce, publish or otherwise use
and to authorize others to use, the work or materials for government
purposes.
16of18
(vii) Religious Organization
The Subrecipient agrees that funds provided under this contract will not
be utilized to support or engage in any explicitly religious activities as
described in 24 CFR 5.109(d).
12. ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
A. Air and Water
The Subrecipient agrees to comply with the following requirements insofar as
they apply to the performance of this contract:
- Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C., 7401, et seq.
- Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1251, et seq., as amended,
including 33 U.S.C. § 1318 relating to inspection, monitoring, entry, reports,
and information, as well as other requirements specified in said Section 1251
and Section 1318, and all regulations and guidelines issued thereunder.
- Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regulations pursuant to 40 CFR 50,
as amended.
- All state and local environmental laws, policies and regulations, including but
not limited to the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), California
Public Resources Code Section 21000 et seq. and related Guidelines.
B. Flood Disaster Protection
In accordance with the requirements of the Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973
(42 U.S.C. § 4001), the Subrecipient shall assure that for activities located in an
area identified by FEMA as having special flood hazards, flood insurance under
the National Flood Insurance Program is obtained and maintained as a condition
of financial assistance for acquisition or construction purposes (including
rehabilitation).
C. Lead-Based Paint
The Subrecipient agrees that any construction or rehabilitation of residential
structures with assistance provided under this contract shall be subject to HUD
Lead-Based Paint Regulations at 24 CFR 570.608, and 24 CFR Part 35. Such
regulations pertain to all HUD-assisted housing and require that all owners,
prospective owners, and tenants of properties constructed prior to 1978 be
properly notified that such properties may include lead-based paint. Such
notification shall point out the hazards of lead-based paint and explain the
symptoms, treatment and precautions that should be taken when dealing with
lead-based paint poisoning and the advisability and availability of blood lead level
screening for children under seven. The notice should also point out that if lead
based paint is found on the property, abatement measures may be undertaken.
D. Historic Preservation
The Subrecipient agrees to comply with the Historic Preservation requirements
set forth in the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended (54
U.S.C. § 300101 et seq.) and the procedures set forth in 36 CFR, Part 800,
17 of 18
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation Procedures for Protection of Historic
Properties, insofar as they apply to the performance of this contract.
In general, this requires concurrence from the State Historic Preservation Officer
for all rehabilitation and demolition of historic properties that are fifty years old or
older or that are included on a Federal, state, or local historic property list.
13. SEVERABILITY
If any provision of this Agreement is held invalid, the remainder of the Agreement shall
not be affected thereby and all other parts of this Agreement shall nevertheless be in full
force and effect.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF THE PARTIES HERETO have executed this Agreement this
dayof
ATTEST:
By___________
M lene D. Best Rev. Dennis M ins
City Manager Food Bank A inistrator
APPROVED 0 R
BY:_______________________ Date: 7 City Attorney
18 of 18
EXHIBIT A
STATEMENT OF WORK
CONTRACT TERM: July 1, 2017 through June 30, 2018
ADDRESS OF AGENCY: SANTEE FOOD BANK
P.O. Box 712054
Santee, CA 92072
CONTACT PERSON: Rev. Dennis Martins
PHONE: (619) 448-5950
FAX: Fax: Fax: (619) 448-2096
PROJECT GOALS, OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES:
Subrecipient agrees to provide the following services to City:
1. Emergency food supplies for low and moderate income residents of Santee.
2. Report quarterly performance and demographic data via submiffal of a Quarterly Report,
Attachment “B”, to the CDBG Program Administrator, said Quarterly Report due by the
10th day of the following month. The CDBG Program Administrator may approve an
alternative schedule for the submission of performance and demographic data as
warranted by the nature of the activity performed.
3. Provide a Final Evaluation Report of program’s success meeting established goals.
4. Provide notification to Grantee of any audits or investigations including results, findings,
and/or liens.
. C- Q
0 0 C
.< x Z ,-
-I
C- U)
C ) m m
z 0 -o
CD
0
0
I0
U,
CD
U)
CD
0m
U,
C,,
0
C
C
CD
0
CD
U,-
3
DC 3 CD
3 CD
CD
CD
0
CD
-u 0
- CD
o
0
!‘ -
CD
CD
0
‘< 0
I!
uJCDCD
CD
CDCD
SD
CD2
03
=0
3
C’,,,,
3
Ci)
-EP
9,2
CD
(IC D
CD
CD
D
0
CD
CII
00
03D
-u
H
CD
0
CD
0
00
C3
(0
m
CD
D
0
9,
cn
0
C
0
CD
U,
0
CD
0
C
CD
00
C3
00
C3
D
(0
0
CD
D
0
CI)
cn
CD
D
0
CD
0
CD
% 0
%
Total # Persons Assisted
C W
Non-Low/Mod Clients
H 0
Moderate-Income (80% - 120% of MEl)
Low-Income (30% - 80% of MEl)
m
Extremely Low-Income (<30% of MEl)
-n
Hispanic (culture or origin, regardless of race)
0
Non-Hispanic
- l)
01 QI
White
H
Black/African American
0 0) CAsian
o1
‘ American Indian/Alaskan Native
0
E
— Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander
v
0
—
— American Indian/Alaskan Native and White
0 F)Z
Asian and White
0)0
Black/African American and White
American Indian/Alaskan Native and Black
0)
Other Multi-Racial
CI) Z
Homeless
U)
Persons with Disabilities
Female Head of Household
H U)
Veterans
—C
Over 55 years
I
DC
m
CD
0
CD
MC
-‘I
0
U)
mm
0
-I
EXHIBIT C
SECTION 3 CONTRACT CLAUSES
A. The work to be performed under this contract is subject to the requirements of Section 3
of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968, as amended, 12 U.S.C. iZOlu
(section 3). The purpose of Section 3 is to ensure that employment and other economic
opportunities generated by HUD assistance or HUD-assisted projects covered by
Section 3, shall, to the greatest extent feasible, be directed to low-and very low-income
persons, particularly persons who are recipients of HUD assistance for housing.
B. The parties to this contract agree to comply with HUD’s regulations in 24 CFR part 135,
which implement Section 3. As evidenced by their execution of this contract, the parties
to this contract certify that they are under no contractual or other impediment that would
prevent them from complying with part 135 regulations.
C. The contractor agrees to send each labor organization or representative of workers with
which the contractor has a collective bargaining agreement or other understanding, if
any, a notice advising the labor organization or workers’ representative of the
contractor’s commitments under this Section 3 clause, and will post copies of the notice
in conspicuous places at the work site where both employees and applicants for training
and employment positions can see the notice. The notice shall describe the Section 3
preference, shall set forth minimum number and job titles subject to hire, availability of
apprenticeship and training positions, the qualifications for each; and the name and
location of the person(s) taking applications for each of the positions; and the anticipated
date the work shall begin.
D. The contractor agrees to include the Section 3 clause in every subcontract subject to
compliance with regulations in 24 CFR part 135, and agrees to take appropriate action,
as provided in an applicable provision of the subcontract or in this Section 3 clause,
upon a finding that the subcontractor is in violation of the regulations in 24 CFR part 135.
The contractor will not subcontract with any subcontractor where the contractor has
notice or knowledge that the subcontractor has been found in violation of the regulations
in 24 CFR part 135.
E. The contractor will certify that any vacant employment positions, including training
positions, that are filled (1) after the contractor is selected but before the contract is
executed, and (2) with persons other than those to whom the regulations of 24 CFR part
135 require employment opportunities to be directed, were not filled to circumvent the
contractor’s obligations under 24 CFR part 135.
F. Noncompliance with HUD’s regulations in 24 CFR part 135 may result in sanctions,
termination of this contract for default, and debarment or suspension from future HUD
assisted contracts.
G. With respect to work performed in connection with Section 3 covered Indian housing
assistance, Section 7(b) of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act
(25 U.S.C. 450e) also applies to the work to be performed under this contract. Section
7(b) requires that to the greatest extent feasible (i) preference and opportunities for
training and employment subcontracts shall be given to Indians, and (ii) preference in
the award of contracts and subcontracts shall be given to Indian organizations and
Indian-owned Economic Enterprises. Parties to this contract that are subject to the
provisions of Section 3 and Section 7(b) agree to comply with Section 3 to the maximum
extent feasible, but not in derogation of compliance with Section 7(b).