PROJECT "A WAY BACK HOME" GRANT AGREEMENT
THIS GRANT AGREEMENT ("Agreement") is made as of this I lP􀅞day of􀅟􀅠?)19, by
and between the CITY OF EL CAJON, a public body corporate and politic (the "City") and
RTHecEip iSeAnLt"V). ATThIeO CNi tyA RanMdY t,h ea GCraalnifto Rrneiaci pcieonrpt oarraet icoonl le(hcteivreeilnya rfetefer rrreedfe trore ads tthoe a "sP a"rGtireasn."t
RECITALS A. oOfn "A'Au gWusAt Y8 , B2A01C7K, thHeO CMiEty' CRoEuUncNilI FoIfC tAheT ICOiNty oPfR EOl JCEaCjoTn" a(pthpero v"Gedra tnhte") fuinn dtihneg amount of not to exceed TEN THOUSAND DOLLARS ($10,000.00) (the "Grant
Awardu) to Grant Recipient.
B. Grant Recipient has proposed a project that reunifies homeless individuals currently residing in El Cajon with families or friends outside of the San Diego
hCoomunetlye srse ignidoinvi d(uthaels "toP rdoejetecrtm").i neT ifh ree uPnrioficjeacttio nw owrokus ldw biteh bfeanmeifliyc iaml. eTmhbee Prsr oajencdt saelstotle pmaeyns t.f or eligible costs associated with transportation, lodging, food and reC.
As of February 28, 2019, the initial Grant Award has been fully expended and thirtyonfin
thee ( 3r9e)g iinond.i viBdausaelsd h oanv teh be eseunc cseuscsc eosf sthfuell yP rroejuencitt,e tdh ew iPtha rftaiemsi ldye osri rferi eton dresn oeuwts tihdee aPgRrOeeJmECenTt" sfoerr vcicoenst,i nwuiathti oan n eowf Gthrea n"t' AA wWarAdY in BthAeC aKm HouOnMt oEf' nRotE tUo NeIxFcIeCeAdT ION TEN
THOUSAND DOLLARS ($10,000.00). D. RTheec ipGierannt,t aAsw daerdfi nsehda ilnl bthei sin G trhaen fto Armgr eoefm ae rneti,m wbiuthrs tehme einntet nfrto tmo stheerv Ce iaty mtoin Gimraumnt of twenty (20) locally residing hom􀅡less individuals.
AGREEMENT NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the recitals stated above, the mutual covenants
set forth below, the Parties agree, promise and declare as follows:
ARTICLE I. GRANT PROVISIONS
Section 1.1 - The Grant Award. The City hereby awards to Grant Recipient, for
the purpose of the Project, the Grant Award in the amount of not to exceed TEN
THOUSAND DOLLARS ($10,000.00), according to the terms and conditions set forth
below:
Section 1.2 - No Partnership or Joint Venture. and Grant Recipient created by this Agreement shall Tnhoet breel aotnioen sohf ippa brtentewresehnip thoer jCoiintyt
venture.
Section 1.3 - Indemnification. defend, indemnify, and hold harmless tGhera Cnitt yR oefc Eipli eCnatj oang, raeneds iatsn rde spproemctiisvees e lteoc pterdo taenctd, appointed officials, officers, directors, agents, employees and representatives from any
Project "A Way Back Home" Grant Agreement
Safvation Army and City of El Cajon
April 10, 2019
Page 1 of17
and all liabilities, losses, damages, including, but not limited to, claims for injury or death
to any person occurring as a result of the Project, including losses from negative cash
flows. It is expressly understood that Grant Recipient is solely and exclusively responsible
for any and all management of the Project.
Section 1.4 - Termination. This Agreement and the relationship created herein
shall terminate upon full satisfaction of all of Grant Recipient's obligations under this
Agreement, or the exhaustion of the Grant Award unless Grant Recipient is found to be
in breach of this Agreement. The City reserves the right to terminate this Agreement in
the event Grant Recipient is deemed to be in default of any of the obligations herein.
Section 1.5 - Conditions to City Obligations and Covenants of Grant Recipient.
The obligation of the City to fund the Grant Award is subject to the following conditions
and Grant Recipient agrees to perform any and all covenants hereinafter set forth in a
timely manner.
(a) The City shall reimburse Grant Recipient for eligible expenditures related to
the reunification of a homeless individual.
(b) Upon a written request from Grant Recipient, the City may make cash
advances of up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the Grant Amount for working
capital to Grant Recipient. Additional advances of no greater than 25% shall
be requested in writing as each advance is reduced and will be made based
on needs as determined by City's City Manager or such person designated
by the City Manager.
Any outstanding advances will be returned on or before the termination of this
Agreement as either a reduction of the final reimbursement request or a
transfer of funds from Grant Recipient. Grant Recipient shall indicate in
writing, no later than three (3) months prior to the termination of this
Agreement, detailing how the advance shall be returned to the City.
(c) The Grant Recipient certifies and agrees that it will not use funds provided
through this Agreement to pay for entertainment, gifts1 alcoholic beverages,
or unreasonable costs for the purposes set forth in Recital Band pursuant to
this Agreement. Grant Recipient further certifies and agrees that it will at no
time provide cash directly to homeless individuals that are participants in this
Project.
(d) Grant Recipient shall be eligible for reimbursement if the following criteria are
met:
1. The individual reunited with family or friends shall be a documented
homeless indiVldual that is residing in the City of El Cajon,
2. The homeless individual shall be relocated outside of San Diego
County, and
3. Receipts documenting eligible costs are presented in an orderly manner
to the City.
Project'􀂭 Way Back Home" Grant Agreement
Salvation Army and City of El Cajon
April 10, 2019
Page 2 of 17
(e) The average cost per relocation is estimated to be $500. If a reimbursement
request exceeds $600, Grant Recipient shall seek written approval from the
City prior to agreeing to reunification expenditures.
(f) Grant Recipient shall provide a quarterly status report as defined in Section
1.8. Quarterly status reports shall be submitted to the City no later than:
1. October 15th for the period of July, August and September;
2. January 15th for the period of October, November and December;
3. April 15th for the period of January, February and March; and
4. July 15th for the period of April, May and June.
A final report at the conclusion of the grant period shall also be provided.
(g) Grant Recipient represents, warrants and agrees that: (i) funds reimbursed
by the City pursuant to this Agreement are advanced wholly or in part for
the benefit of the Grant Recipient, and (ii) Grant Recipient is responsible for
all obligations created by this Agreement.
(h) Grant Recipient agrees to and shall use the funds herein solely for and in
connection with those purposes set forth in Recital B and pursuant to this
Agreement;
(i) Grant Recipient shall provide the City with insurance as referenced on
Exhibit "A" hereto naming the City of El Cajon, and its elected and appointed
officials, officers, directors, and employees, as additional insureds, at the
sole cost and expense of the Grant Recipient. Said Insurance shall remain
in full force and effect during the term of this Agreement.
Section 1.6 - Grant Recipient's Representations and Warranties. Grant Recipient
represents, warrants and can demonstrate that:
(a) The Grant Recipient is a validly and lawfully formed nonprofit corporation,
is in good standing under California law, whose income is exempt from
taxation under section 501 (c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code;
(b) Execution of this Agreement has been duly authorized by the Grant
Recipient and shall not result, with the passage of time or the giving of
notice, or both, In breach of, or in acceleration of, performance under any
contract or document to which the Grant Recipient may be a party;
(c) All approvals have been obtained in connection with the Grant Recipient's
execution of this Agreement and related agreements and documents, to the
effect that no breach of or acceleration of performance under any other
agreement or document to which Grant Recipient is a party will result from
such execution; and
(d) Grant Recipient agrees to use said funds solely for and in connection with
the purposes referenced in Recital B of this Agreement.
Project "A Way Back Home» Grant Agreement
Salvation Army and City of El Cajon
April 10, 2019
Page 3 of 17
Section 1.7 - Equal Opportunity. During the term of this Agreement, the Grant
Recipient agrees as follows:
(a) The Grant Recipient will not unlawfully discriminate against any employee,
person, program participant or applicant for employment because of race,
age, sexual orientation, marital status, color, religion, sex, handicap, or
national origin. The Grant Recipient will take affirmative action to ensure
that applicants are employed, and that employees are treated during
employment, without regard to their race, age, sexual orientation, marital
status, color, religion, sex, handicap, or national origin, if such discrimination
is in violation of federal, state, or city laws, regulations, ordinances, or
policies. Such action shall include, but not be limited to the following:
employment, upgrading, demotion, or transfer, recruitment or recruitment
advertising; lay-off or termination; rates of pay or other forms of
compensation; and selection for training, including apprenticeship. The
Grant Recipient agrees to post in conspicuous places, available to
employees and applicants for employment, notices, which are available
from the City, setting forth the provisions of this nondiscrimination clause.
(b) The Grant Recipient will, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees
or contractors or subcontractors placed by or on behalf of the Grant
Recipient, state that all qualified applicants will receive consideration for
employment without regard to race, age, sexual orientation, marital status,
color, religion, sex, handicap, or national origin.
(c) The Grant Recipient will cause the foregoing provisions to be inserted in all
contracts and subcontracts for any work covered by this Agreement so that
such provisions will be binding upon each subcontractor, provided that the
foregoing provisions shall not apply to contracts or subcontracts for
standard commercial supplies of raw materials.
(d) The Grant Recipient hereby agrees to comply with Title VII of the Civil Rights
Act of 1964, as amended, and the California Fair Employment Practices Act.
Section 1.8 - Quarterly Status Reports. Grant Recipient shall provide the City with
detailed written status reports concerning the status of the Project each quarter as defined
in Section 1.5(d). Such reports shall include, but not be limited to, the following: (1) total
expenditures of Grant Funds to date, (2) expenditure per individual served, (3) location of
reunification, (4) demographic and profile information of each individual served, to
include:
A. Number of individual clients served
B. Race of each client served
C. Ethnicity of each client served (whether Hispanic or not- a person may be of any race
and also be Hispanic)
D. Number of disabled clients served
E. Whether or not the head of the household is female
Project "A Way Back Home" Grant Agreement
Salvation Army and City of El Cajon
April 10, 2019
Page 4 of17
F. Number of clients who are low income (according to HUD guidelines)
G . Whether or not the client is an El Cajon resident
H. Age of clients served;
I. Birthplace of clients served;
J . Client's length of time most recent continuous homelessness;
K. Client's length of time homeless in El Cajon;
L, Location of client's last permanent housing ;
M. Location client slept at n ig ht In El Cajon;
N. Income information (amount and sources, if any);
O. Information on whether client has a history of substance abuse, and if so, the
respective substance;
P. Outreach and incentive methods used;
Q. The amount of time it takes from project enrollment to the actual move􀄥in date;
R. Whether or not the clients served are chronically homeless;
S. Client's housing status three (3) and six (6) months after being reunified;
T. Source of housing assistance funds used, if any;
U. Number and disposition of referrals provided;
V. Information on whether and why the client turned down the assistance, if applicable;
W. Progress made toward goals as evidenced in Recitals "B" and "C", or an explanation
of lack thereof; and
X. Any other accomplishments or problems/concerns the Agency wishes to report.
Quarterly Status Reports shall be p rovided u ntil s ix (6) months following the
reu nification and placement of the last homeless individual served .
Section 1 .9 - Insurance. Gra nt Recipient shall, at Grant Recipient's sole cost and
expense, maintain such insurance, as is required by the City, in ful l force and effect,
during the e ntire term of this Agreement. The insurance shall name the City and the C ity
of El Cajon as additional insureds and shall i nclude, but n ot be limited to , those coverages
referenced in Exhibit "A" to this Ag reement and as referenced i n Section 1 .5(h) of this
Agreement, except that, n otwithstanding the limits described in Exhibit "A," limits of
liability shall be $1 ,000,000 per i n d ividual, and $3,000,000 in the aggregate for each
occurre n ce.
Section 1 . 1 0 - Default by Grant Recipient. I n the event of a default by Grant
Recipient In the performance of any of the terms, covenants and conditions contained In
this Agreement, or in the event of the commencement of Bankruptcy proceedings by o r
against Grant Recipient, a l l s u m s n ot yet d isbursed o r advanced b y t h e City shall
immediately be suspended and this Agreement shall, at the option of City, terminate. The
City shall thereafter be released from any and all o bllgatrons to Grant Recipient under the
terms of this Agreement.
Project "A Way Back Home" Grant Agreement
Salvation Army and City of El Cajon
April 10, 2019
Page 5 of 17
Section 1 .1 1 - Indemnification. Grant Recipient agrees to indemnify and hold
harmless the City and its elected and appointed officials, officers, directors and
employees, from and against any and all claims, damages, losses, liability costs
(including costs and fees incurred in defense of such claims), expenses and amounts
paid in settlement arising from any injury, claim, or damages arising out of Grant
Recipient's work on the Project.
Section 1 . 1 2 - Books and Records. The undersigned Grant Recipient, and any
contractor hired by the Grant Recipient, shall maintain complete and accurate books and
records showing all of the income and disbursements made in connection with the Project
and such books and records shall be available for inspection and copy by the City upon
request. Books and records relative to the Project and this Grant Award shall be
maintained for five years after final project expenditures are reimbursed.
Section 1 .1 3 - City's Reliance on Statements and Disclosure of Grant Recipient.
Grant Recipient has made certain statements in order to induce the City to make said
Grant Award and enter into this Agreement, and in the event Grant Recipient has made
material misrepresentations or omissions it Is a breach of this Agreement, and the act of
doing so shall not affect any remedies the City may have under this Agreement for such
misrepresentation or omission.
Section 1 .1 4 - City not Liable for Acts or Omissions of Grant Recipient or Others.
City shall In no way be liable for any acts or omissions of Grant Recipient, any agent or
contractor employed by Grant Recipient, or any person furnishing labor and/or materials
used in or related to the Project.
Section 1 . 1 5 - Time of the Essence. Time is of the essence in this Agreement and
of each and every provision hereof. The waiver by the City of any breach or breaches
hereof shall not be deemed, nor shall the same constitute, a waiver of any subsequent
breach or breaches.
ARTICLE II. M ISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section 2.1 - Governmental Requirements Superior. All prov1s1ons of this
Agreement and of all the other documents relating to this Agreement shall be subject and
subordinate to any and all federal, state and local statutes, regulations, and ordinances,
and shall be subject to modification to comply therewith.
Section 2.2 - Notice. Any Notice under this Agreement shall be deemed given
upon actual personal delivery to the notified Party or upon the expiration of two (2) days
from the insertion of the notice, properly addressed and certified mail, return receipt
requested, postage prepaid, in a U . S. Mall depository within California, or upon the
expiration of seven (7) days from the insertion of the notice in a U. S. Mall depository
outside of California. Notices shall be sent to the addresses for the Parties as set forth
below or as changed by either Party from time to time by written notice to the other Party.
Project "A Way Back Home" Grant Agreement
Salvation Army and City of El Cajon
April 10, 2019
Page 6 of 17
City: Ms. Jamie van Ravesteyn
City of El Cajon
200 Civic Center Way
El Cajon, CA 92020
Grant Recipient: The Salvation Army
1 011 E. Main Street
El Cajon, CA 92020
Attn: Capt. Sean Kelsey
Section 2.3 - Severabifity. If any provision of this Agreement is deemed to be invalid or
unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, that provision shall be severed from
the rest of this Agreement, and the remaining provisions shall continue in full force and
effect.
Section 2.4 - Non-Waiver of City's Rights. No right, remedy, or power of the City
under this Agreement shall be deemed to have been waived by any act or conduct on the
part of the City or by any failure to exercise or delay in exercising such right, remedy or
power. Every such right, remedy or power of the City shall continue In full force and effect
until specifically waived or released by an instrument in writing executed by the City. No
delay or omission of the City to exercise any right or power arising upon the occurrence
of any default under this Agreement shall impair any such right or power o r shall be
construed to be a waiver of any such default or an acquiescence therein; and every power ·
and remedy given by this Agreement to the City may be exercised from time to time and
as often as may be deemed expedient.
Section 2.5 - Exhibits Incorporated. All exhibits to which reference is made in this
Agreement are deemed incorporated Into this Agreement whether or not the exhibits are
actually attached to this Agreement.
Section 2.6 - Construction of Agreement. The provisions contained in this
Agreement shall not be construed in favor of or against either Party, but shall be construed
as if both Parties contributed equally to its preparation. This Agreement shall be construed
in accordance with the laws of the State of California.
Section 2.7 - Assignment. Grant Recipient shall not assign its rights nor delegate
its duties under this Agreement without the prior written consent of the City. Any attempt
at assignment or delegation in violation of this Section 2.7 shall be void. The City shall
have the full right and authority to assign all or part of its rights and delegate all or part of
its duties under this Agreement.
Section 2.8 - Integration. This Agreement represents the entire agreement
between the Parties on the subject matter of this Agreement, and supersedes any other
agreements, promises or representations, oral or written, pertaining to such subject
matter.
Section 2.9 - Counterparts. This Agreement may be executed in one or more
counterparts, each of which shall be deemed an original, but all of which together shall
Project '􀂭 Way Bao/< Home'' Grant Agreement
Salvation Army and City of El Cajon
April 10, 20 19
Page 7 of 17
constitute one and the same instrument. It shall not be necessary In making proof of this
Agreement to produce or account for more than one counterpart.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Parties have executed this Agreement on the date first
set forth above.
CITY:
CITY OF EL CAJON,
a California charter city and
municipal corporation
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
of El Cajon
GRANT RECIPIENT:
THE SALVATION ARMY,
a California ·corporation
􀀉y:.;..' ---'-+----------
Its: General Secretary
By; __________ Its: ------------
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
BY: ------------
Counsel to Grant Recipient
Project "A Way Back Home" Grant Agreement
Salvation Army and City of El Cajon
Aprfl 10, 2019
Page B of 1 7
constitute one and the same instrument. It shall not be necessary in making proof of this
Agreement to produce or account for more than one counterpart.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Parties have executed this Agreement on the date first
set forth above.
CITY:
CITY OF EL CAJON I
a California charter city and
municipal corporation
By: __________ G raham Mitchell
City Manager
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
By: ________ 􀄦
Morgan L. Foley,
City Attorney, City of El Cajon
GRANT RECIPIENT:
THE SALVATION ARMY,
a California corporation
By: ____________ Its: -------------
By: ___________ Its: ------------
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
7' J
BY: JD i
-􀒇C-:--o :-:-un=-=s-e.--:1 t􀒈G􀒉r􀒊a=-n t:--;R=--e􀒋c ""'ipr."ie"""n
="T't
===---
Terry 0. Ji
Project ''.4 Way Back Home" Grant Agreement
Salvation Army and City of El Cajon
April 10, 2019
Page 8 of 1 7
EXHIBIT "A"
CITY COUNCIL POLI CY D-3
(attached)
Project "A Way Back Home" Grant Agreement
Salvation Army and City of El Cajon
April 10, 20 19
Page 9 of 17
SUBJECT :
REFERENCE :
PURPOSE
C I TY OF EL CAJON
C ITY COU N C I L POLICY
Insurance Requirements
Adopted 7/26/94
AAmmeennddeedd 0141/ /1249//1055
POLICY
D-3
E F FECTIVE PAG E
04/14/15 1 of 8
iTtso cporonvsiidsete an tu anpifpolricma tCioitny . policy for liability insurance requirements and to establish procedures for
BACKGROUND
Tcoon hdeulcpt ipnrgo bteucsti nthees sC iinty a asgsoaciniastti olinab wiliitthy,, oanll ibnedhivaildf uoaf, lso,r c ino ncetrratactino rcsir, caugmesntcainecse asn wdi tohring athneiz Catitioy nosf El Cajon are required to maintain adequate liability insurance coverage acceptable to the City.
tBheec aCuitsye h oafs t hees dtaiffbelisrihnegd le pvoellisc yo fl ipmroittse catniodn s nteaenddeadrd fos rw vhairciohu dsi raecctitvlyit ieresl actoen tdou cthteed t wypiteh inof t haec tCivitityy, being conducted.
POLICY
AEll l CInadjiovnid (uoarl sth, ceo Snutrcaccetosrsso, ra Aggeennccieys ,t oa nthde o Ergl aCnaizjoanti oRnesd ceovnedloupctminegn bt uAsgineenscsy )e oithr epru frosru tahnet C toity a onf porrodvinidaen cper,o roefs oofl ulitaiobnili,t ya ginreseumraenncte oirn pthoelic fyo lrloewquinirgin agm thoeu nmtsa ianntedn wanricttee no fo lnia abnili toyc icnusrurerannccee b sahsaisll a(cvlaaiimlabs lem):a de coverage will be accepted only after verifying that occurrence coverage is not
1. Aco cnosmtrubcintioend psirnogjelec tslim aint dp ofolicr yc awrinthiv aalgsg, rseugbadtiev isliimonitss , ina ntdh ep oalmlutoiounn t coofv e$r2a gmei llsiounb jfeocrt atoll section 5.c. under the heading "INSURANCE STANDARDS," with a maximum deductible
or selfMinsurance retention ("SIR11) limit," minimum limits In amounts aosf f$o5ll0o0w,0s:0 0; for policies not having a "combined single
CCoGmL moen rcaina l "Gocecnuerrraeln Lcieability (CGL): Insurance Services Office Form CG 00 01 covering 11 damage, bodily Injury and bpaesrsiso,n ianlc &lu addinvge rptirsoindgu cintsju rayn wd itcho lmimpiltest endo loepsse rtahtaionn $s1, ,p0r0o0p,0e0rt0y apeprp olyc sceuprraernactee.l yIf t ao gtheinse prraol jaegcgt/rleogcaattieo nlim oirt athpep lgieesn, eeriathl earg tghree ggaetnee rliaml iat gsghraelgl abtee tliwmicite s hthaell required occurrence limit.
lUimnilet, sths es t$a2ff,0 d0e0te,0r0m0in liemsi tt hsahat cll ibrceu dmesctraenacseesd (tio.e $. 1h,i0g0h0 r,i0sk0 0p wroijtehc at, metacx.)im reuqmu idree dthuec thibigleh oerr
SIR of $150,000, when:
EXHI BI T "A"'
SUBJECT :
REFERENCE :
C ITY OF EL CAJO N
C ITY C O U N C I L POLI CY
Insurance Requirements
Adopted 7/26/94
Amended 1 1/29/05
Amended 04/14/15
POLICY
D-3
EFFECTIVE PAGE
04/14/15 2 of 8
a. The public improvements portion of a subdivision project is less than $50,000; or
b. A construction project (In accordance with the Standard Specifications for Public
Works Construction-and the Standard Special Provisions, the "Green Book") is for
less than $50,000.
2. Except as otherwise provided in this policy, a combined single limit policy with aggregate
limits in the amount of $2 million for all others, including, but not limited to, athletic leagues,
recreation groups, towing companies and public service agencies; for policles not having a
"combined single limit," minimum limits in amounts as follows:
Commercial General Liability (CGL): Insurance Services Office Form CG 00 0 1 covering
CGL on an "occurrence" basis, including products and completed operations, property
damage, bodily injury and personal & advertising injury with limits no less than $1,000,000
per occurrence. If a general aggregate limit applies, either the general aggregate limit shall
apply separately to this project/location or the general aggregate limit shall be twice the
required occurrence limit.
3. A combined single limit policy with aggregate limits in the amount of $250,000 for
homeowners insurance or $500,000 for commercial general liability insurance for small
business owners, in either event only where the insurance is required for work In the public
right-of-way. "Small business owners" are defined as commercial businesses, or a
professional or administrative office uses, where the owners of the business work on-site
as their primary calling or vocation, and having no more than two (2) employees not related
by blood or marriage.
4. Selected high-risk activities that would otherwise fall under the criteria for category 2 shall
be evaluated by staff on a case-by-case basis to determine whether or not the above limits
are sufficient. The imposition of liability limits exceeding $2 million for such high􀒌risk
activities is appealable to the City Council.
5. $ 1,000,000 for taxicab companies.
6. $500,000 or actual value, whichever is greater, for "valuable papers" and "in transit"
Insurance where City records or personal property is being transported or stored outside of
City property.
SUBJECT :
REFERENCE :
C ITY OF EL CAJ O N
C I TY C O U N C I L POLI CY
Insurance Requirements
Adopted 7 /26/94
Amended 11 /29/05
Amended 04/14/15
P O LICY
D-3
EFFECTIVE PAGE
04/14/15 3 of 8
7. Exceptions to the above limits may be made for non-profit, charitable, political, community
and religious organizations.
8 . The policy or policies of insurance may be for all operations or activities of the party
purchasing the policy or policies provided, however, that the City or the Successor Agency
may require a separate policy exclusively for operations of the purchaser where the City
Manager, in his or her sole discretion, determines that a single policy would be inadequate
to protect the City or Successor Agency in the event of multiple catastrophes.
9. Workers' compensation insurance shall meet the minimum limits required by law.
INSURANCE STANDARDS
1. ADMITTED CARRIER / BEST'S RATING A, CLASS VII
a. Insurers must be "admitted" carriers pursuant to the provisions of the California
Insurance Code and in accordance with all requirements of the State Insurance
Commission and must be listed in the:
"OFFICIAL PUBLICATION
DEPARTMENT OF I NSURANCE
STATE OF CALIFORNIA
45 Fremont Street
San Francisco, California 94105
INSURANCE ORGANIZATIONS AUTHORIZED BY THE INSURANCE
COMMISSION TO TRANSACT BUSINESS OF INSURANCE
IN THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA DURING
[the most recent year for which
the publication is available].n
or
"California Department of Insurance Company Profile."
SUBJECT :
REFERENCE :
CITY OF E L CAJO N
C ITY -CO U N C I L POLICY
Insurance Requirements
Adopted 7 /26/94
Amended 11 /29/05
Amended 04/14/15
P O L ICY
D-3
E F F ECTIVE PAG E
04/14/15 4 of 8
b, Insurers must have a Best's rating of A, Class VII or higher (this rating includes
those insurers with a minimum policyholder's surplus of $50 to $100 million).
Exceptions to the Best's rating may be considered when an insurance carrier meets
all other standards and can satisfy surplus amounts equivalent to an A, Class VII
rating. An exception to the rating requirement may be made for the California State
Compensation Insurance Fund if not rated.
2. NON-ADMITTED CARRIER / BEST'S RATING A, Class XII
Exceptions to the "admitted11 requirement may be considered when a non-admitted
insurance carrier meets all other standards herein and:
a. is either (i) listed in:
California Department of Insurance
List of Approved Surplus Line Insurers
LISTING OF FILINGS
or (ii) is currently a party to co-operation agreements with foreign insurance
regulatory authorities acceptable to the City Manager or City Attorney (for example,
for insurers located in the United Kingdom, agreements must be with both the
Prudential Regulatory Authority ("PRA") and the Financial Conduct Authority ("FCA"),
or such successor authority or authorities of PRA and FCA;
b. either the carrier or its parent company has a Best's rating of A, Class VII (this rating
include those insurers with a minimum policyholder1s surplus of $50 to $100 million;
c. has ten years or more experience in the business of insurance; and
d. if applicable, the reinsurance carrier has a qualified rating.
3. GENERAL - INSURANCE CERTIFICATES / ADDITIONAL INSURED
All insurers (including those insuring against pollution or discharges of hazardous
materials) must provide certificates of insurance and endorsements evidencing coverage
prior to the start of any contract. All certificates or endorsements must include:
SU BJECT :
CITY OF E L CAJO N
C ITY C O U N C I L POLI CY
Insurance Requirements POLICY
D-3
REFERENCE : Adopted 7 /26/94 EFFECTIVE PAG E AAmmeennddeedd 0141//2149//1055
• Name of insurance company issuing each policy.
04/14/15 5 of 8
A(alnl din/sour rtehres Smuucscte pssroovri dAeg eannc yo rtiog inthael eEnl dCoarsjoenm Reentd envaemloinpgm tehnet ACgitey nocfy )E, l aCndaj oitns
(their) elected and appointed officials, officers, employees and volunteers (for
paudrdpiotisoensa lo ifn sthuisre Pdsol. icTyh, iisn dinivcidluusailolyn aansd a dcdoitllioencatilv ienslyu,r etdhse s"hCalilt yn oI1n bseu rreeqdusi"re) da osf
wWaoivrkeedr sfo' Cr "ovmalupaebnslea ptiaonp eorrs p" rcoofveesrsaiognea wl liitahb tihlitey appoplicroievsa lo off i nthseu rCaintyc eA, tatonrdn emya. y be • All insurers must provide an original endorsement stating that the insurance cSouvcecreasgseo rs Ahaglel nbcey p troi mthaer yE iln Csaujroann cRee adse vreelsoppemcetsn tth Aeg Cenitcyy o),f aEnld C itasjo (tnh e(airn) de/loerc ttehed Panodlic ayp, pinodinivteiddu oafllfyic iaanlsd, ocfofilcleecrtsiv, eelmy, ptloheye e"Cs itayn dIn svuorluendtse. eArsn y(fo irn spuurrapnocsee so or fs tehlifsinsurance
maintained by the Entity, its officers, officials, employees, or volunteers
• shall be excess of the Contractor's insurance and shall not contribute with it. CWoaviveerar goef. Subrogation endorsement is required on Workers' Compensation • Address of named insured. • Description of coverage, including any special coverage required by the contract. • Policy numbers. • Policy periods (If claims made basis, must include retroactive date and length of • time allowed as extended reporting period). • Coverage type (occurrence form vs. claims made). dAiugtithaol risziegdn astiugrnea tisu rea cacnedp tdaabtlee osfo islsounagn acse . it Acno morpiglieinsa lw sitigh ntahteu rere iqsu riereqmuierendts: oaf • Government Code §16.5. tUhnalte sqsu aaplifpierosv tehde b oyb thligea Ctiiotyn Moaf ntahge ecr aorrr dieers tiog npereo,v nidoe c e3r0ti fdicaaytes swhraitltl ebne ancoctiecpet eodf pcaronvcidelela tnioonti coef tohfe cpaonlicceyl.l aWtioitnh mthaey a bpper orveadlu ocfe tdh eto C titeyn A (tt1o0r)n edya tyhse, bobutli goantiloy nf otor
termination due to the non-payment of any premium.
SUBJ ECT :
REFERENCE :
CITY OF EL CAJON
C ITY COU N C I L POLICY
Insurance Requirements
Adopted 7 /26/94
Amended 1 1 /29/05
Amended 04/1 4/1 5
POLI C Y
D-3
EFFECTIVE PAGE
04/1 4/1 5 6 of 8
4. P U BLIC WORKS PROJECTS
In addition to the standards set forth above, insurance policies for public works projects
must also meet the following insurance requirements set out in the most recent edition of
the Green Book adopted by the City Council:
a. All insurance certificates shall bear an endorsement or shall have attached a rider
whereby it is provided that, in the event of expiration or proposed cancellation of
such policy for any reason whatsoever, the City shall be notified by certified mail,
return receipt requested, giving a sufficient time before the date thereof to comply
with any applicable law or statute, but in no event less than thirty (30) days before
expiration or cancellation is effective, the provisions of section 3 herein
notwithstanding; and
b. Compliance with Labor Code §§3700 and 3800 relating to Workers' Compensation.
c. Requirements of the Green Book shall prevail.
5. PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
An applicant for permit(s) to do work within the public right-of-way may establish
satisfactory proof of liability insurance in the following manner:
a. CONTRACTORS
Contractors must furnish the City with a certificate of liability insurance, which meets
the requirements set forth above and any other City requirements contained in this
policy.
b. HOMEOWNERS / P ROPERTY OWNERS
Homeowners/Property owners requesting a permit to do work within City rights-ofway
or easements immediately adjacent to their respective owned or occupied
property, solely for the owner's personal benefit, shall be required to furnish the City
with a copy of their homeowner's/property owner's liability insurance policy, which
meets the requ irements set forth above, with the minimum limits described In
category 3 under the heading "POLICY," above. The policy must be effective during
the entire period of the proposed work, p·lus two (2) calendar years, and must
provide coverage for claims arising from the work performed, or improvements
owned, by the homeowner in the right-of-way or easement. If the encroachment is
SUBJECT :
REFERENCE :
C ITY OF EL CAJ O N
CITY COU N C I L PO LICY
Insurance Requirements
Adopted 7/26/94
Amended 1 1 /29/05
Amended 04/1 4/1 5
E F FECTIVE
04/1 4/1 5
POLICY
D-3
PAG E
7 of 8
ongoing, annual proof of insurance shall be required. The requirement to name the
City as an additional insured, and the requirement for a policy for two (2) additional
calendar years, may each be waived by the City Council or the City Manager (or her
designee) in cases of extreme hardship, in their discretion.
c. POLLUTION EXCLUSION
Applications for the installatlon of monitoring wells for the evaluation of groundwater
pollution or for the discharge of formerly polluted groundwater into the City sewer
system must be accompanied by a certificate of liability insurance provided by the
property owner. Such liability insurance may not contain a pollution exclusion clause
and must explicitly indemnify the City against all hazards which may result from
either of these activities, including a worsening of pollution, either within the
subsurface adjacent to the original pollution or within the City sewer system.
If the property owner is unable to provide insurance which addresses both general
liability and pollution liability, the environmental company or other appropriately
qualified entity contracting with the property owner for either monitoring well
installation or groundwater pollution remediation, may furnish pollution liability
insurance on behalf of the property owner.
Any insurance approved under this subsection c. shall be an occurrence policy, and
shall otherwise comply with the provisions of this Policy.
d. PUBLIC UTILITIES
This policy as it relates to work in the public rights-of-way shall not be applicable to
Cable TV, Helix Water District, Padre Dam Municipal Water District, SBC, San
Diego Gas & Electric, or any other public utility.
e. TRANSPORTATION / OVERSIZE LOADS -PERMITS - See Chapter 10.24 of the
El Cajon Municipal Code.
SUBJECT :
REFERENC E :
CITY OF EL CAJ O N
C I TY COU N C I L PO LICY
Insurance Requirements
Adopted 7/26/94
Amended 11/ 29/05
Amended 04/14/15
TIME LIMITS / CANCELLATION PROVISIONS
POLICY
D-3
EFFECTIVE PAGE
04/14/15 8 of 8
All liability insurance required pursuant to this policy shall provide coverage for a sufficient time
period to protect the City from liability. The insurer is required to provide a minimum of thirty (30)
days-notice of cancellation of any policy. With the approval of the City Attorney (except as
provided in section 4, herein) this obligation may be reduced to not less than ten (10) days written
notice, but only for termination due to the non"payment of any premium. In no event shall a policy
be accepted which terminates prior to the completion of the activity to be covered.
In certain circumstances, it may be impracticable to obtain continuing insurance coverage due to
the duration of the actiVity or the cost of premature renewal. Under such circumstances, an
exception to the coverage period may be made so long as the policy is renewed or replaced with
an acceptable insurance carrier and there is no lapse in coverage. Maintenance of proper
insurance coverage is a material term of any contract with the City and failure to maintain or
renew coverage or to provide evidence of renewal may be treated as a material breach of
contract.
ALTERNATIVE RISK MANAGEMENT PRACTICES; SELF-INSURANCE; RISK-POOLING
Alternative risk management practices, such as self-insurance, risk pooling, risk retention groups,
and other such programs, will be accepted in lieu of commercial insurance policies provided that
the coverage meets the requirements of this Policy. Any such alternative risk management
practices must meet the financial strength and surplus requirements reflected by the Best's
Ratings requ ired of commercial insurance under this Policy.