COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT 
AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE CHARTERED CITY OF VISTA 

AND ALPHA PROJECT FOR THE HOMELESS 
THIS COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT AGREEMENT ("Agreement") is made and entered into this July 1, 2020, by and between the CITY OF VISTA, a chartered municipal corporation ("City") and ALPHA PROJECT FOR THE HOMELESS, a California nonprofit corporation ("Subrecipient"). City and Subrecipient are sometimes collectively referred to as the parties. 

RECITALS 
A. The City has entered into various funding agreements with the United States 
Department of Housing and Urban Development ("HUD"), which agreements provide Community Development Block Grant funds ("CDBG Funds" CFDA No. 14.218) to the City under the Federal Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 USC Sections 5301 et seq.), as amended from time to time (the "Act"), and the regulations promulgated thereunder 24 CFR Sections 570 et seq. ("Regulations"). 
B. The Act provides that the City may use CDBG Funds to engage organizations to provide eligible services for certain purposes allowed under the Act. 
C. The Subrecipient proposes to connect with homeless men, women and families to 
conduct comprehensive assessments, link homeless persons to housing navigation and other 
supports. 
NOW, THEREFORE, the parties hereto agree as follows: 
1.0 SUBRECIPIENT OBLIGATIONS 
1.1 Provision of Eligible Services; Use of CDBG Funds. Subrecipient hereby 
agrees to provide those services described in Exhibit A ("Services" or "Project"), which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by this reference. For performing the Project, Subrecipient shall receive the compensation set forth in Exhibit B, Project Compensation, which is attached hereto as Exhibit B and incorporated herein by this reference. Subrecipient understands that the Project Compensation will be paid from CDBG funds and such amounts shall be received and utilized solely for the Project pursuant to all of the terms and conditions of this Agreement. Only actual expenses incurred by Subrecipient are eligible for reimbursement, and then only to the extent allowed by this Agreement. In no event shall Subrecipient be eligible to receive compensation pursuant to this Agreement in excess of the maximum amount set forth in paragraph 2.1 of this Agreement. 
1.2 Representation and Warranties. Subrecipient hereby represents and warrants 
to the City as follows: 
a. Subrecipient has read and is familiar with all of the terms and provisions of 
the Act and the regulations applicable to Subrecipient. 
b. No condition or characteristic of Subrecipient makes it ineligible to receive 
CDBG funds under the Act and the regulations. 
00090584 I ALPHA PROJECT FOR THE HOMELESS 
c. Subrecipient will not use facilities, conduct the Project, or incur expenses 
in a manner which conflicts with or is unpermitted under the Act or for projects funded with CDBG funds. 
d. The Project, as performed by Subrecipient, will not be subject to the Davis-
Bacon Act, 40 USC Sections 276a et seq., as amended from time to time. 
e. The Project, as performed by Subrecipient, will not necessitate compliance with the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970, 42 USC Section 4601 et seq., as amended from time to time. 
1.3 Compliance with Law. Subrecipient shall perform the Project and operate the 
facility, if any, in accordance with all ordinances, resolutions, statutes, rules, and regulations of the City and any Federal, State or local governmental agency having jurisdiction in effect at the time service is rendered, including, but not limited to the Act and the regulations. Particularly, Subrecipient shall comply with the requirements and standards of the following: 
a. 2 CFR Part 200 -"Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, 
and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards"; 
d. All Federal laws and regulations described in Subpart K of 24 CFR Part 
570, including all affirmative action requirements set forth therein, but excluding the City's environmental responsibilities under 24 CFR Section 570.604 and the City's responsibility for initiating the review process under 24 CFR Part 52; and 
e. If Subrecipient is a religious organization, as defined by the regulations, all 
conditions prescribed by HUD for the use of CDBG funds by religious organizations. 

1.4 Licenses, Permits, Fees and Assessments. Subrecipient shall obtain, at its sole 
cost and expense, such licenses, permits and approvals as may be required by law for the performance of the Project and the operation of the facility. 



1.5 Personnel and Participant Conditions. 
a. Civil Rights 
(1) Compliance. The Subrecipient agrees to comply with City and 
State civil rights ordinances and with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 as amended, Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968 as amended, Section 109 of Title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 197 4, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, Executive Order 11063, Executive Order 13166, and with Executive Order 11246 as amended by Executive Orders 11375 and 12086. 
(2) Nondiscrimination. The Subrecipient will not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of race, color, creed, religion, ancestry, national origin, sex, disability or other handicap, age, marital status, or status with regard to public assistance. The Subrecipient will take affirmative action to ensure that all employment practices are free from such discrimination. Such employment practices include but are not limited to the following: hiring, upgrading, demotion, transfer, recruitment or recruitment advertising, layoff, termination, rates of pay or other forms of compensation, and selection for training, including apprenticeship. The Subrecipient agrees to post in conspicuous places, available to employees 
00090584 I 2 ALPHA PROJECT FOR THE HOMELESS 
and applicants for employment, notices to be provided by the contracting agency setting forth the provisions of this nondiscrimination clause. 
(3) Land Covenants. This agreement is subject to the requirements of 
Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (P.L. 88-352) and 24 CFR 570, part I. In regard to the sale, lease, or other transfer of land acquired, cleared or improved with assistance provided under this agreement, the Subrecipient shall cause or require a covenant running with the land to be inserted in the deed or lease for such transfer, prohibiting discrimination as herein defined, in the sale, lease or rental, or in the use or occupancy of such land, or in any improvements erected or to be erected thereon, provldllig tliat the City of Vista a1id the United States are beneficiaries of a1id entitled to enforce such covenants. The Subrecipient, in undertaking its obligation to carry out the program assisted hereunder, agrees to take such measures as are necessary to enforce such covenant, and will not itself so discriminate. 
(4) Section 504. The Subrecipient agrees to comply with any federal 
regulations issued pursuant to compliance with Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, (29 
U.S.C. 721) that prohibits discrimination against the handicapped in any federally assisted program. The City of Vista shall provide the Subrecipient with any guidelines necessary for compliance with that portion of the regulations in force during the term of this agreement. 
(5) Access to Service for Persons with Limited English Proficiency. 
The Subrecipient will take reasonable steps to ensure meaningful access to their programs and activities by Limited English Proficiency (LEP) persons as provided in President's Executive Order 13166 of August 11, 2000. The City of Vista shall provide the Subrecipient with guidelines necessary for compliance. 
b. Affirmative Action 
(1) 
Approved Plan. The Subrecipient agrees that it shall be committed to carry out pursuant to the City of Vista's specifications an Affirmative Action Program in keeping with the principles as provided in President's Executive Order 11246 of September 24, 1965. The City of Vista shall provide Affirmative Action guidelines to the Subrecipient to assist in the formulation of such program. The Subrecipient shall submit a plan for an Affirmative Action Program for approval prior to the award of funds. 

(2) 
W/MBE. The Subrecipient will use its best efforts to afford minority and women-owned business enterprises the maximum practicable opportunity to participate in the performance of this agreement. As used in this agreement, the term "minority and female business enterprise" means a business at least 51 % owned and controlled by minority group members or women. For the purposes of this definition, "minority group members" are Afro­Americans, Spanish-speaking, Spanish surnamed or Spanish-heritage Americans, Asian­Americans, and American Indians. The Subrecipient may rely on written representations by Subrecipients regarding their status as minority and female business enterprises in lieu of an independent investigation. 


(3) Access to Records. The Subrecipient shall furnish and cause each of its sub-subrecipients to furnish all information and reports required hereunder and will permit access to its books, records and accounts by the Grantee, HUDor its agent, or other authorized federal officials for purposes of investigation to ascertain compliance with the rules, regulations and provisions stated herein. 
00090584 I 3 ALPHA PROJECT FOR THE HOMELESS 
(4) Notifications. The Subrecipient will send to each labor union or 
representative of workers with which it has a collective bargaining agreement or other contract or understanding, a notice, to be provided by the agency contracting officer, advising the labor union or worker's representative of the Subrecipient's commitments hereunder, and shall post copies of the notice in conspicuous places available to employees and applicants for employment. 
(5) EEO/AA Statement. The Subrecipient will, in all solicitations or 
advertisements for employees placed by or on behalf of the Subrecipient, state that it is an Equal Opportunity or Affirmative Action employer. 
(6) Subcontract Provisions. The Subrecipient will include the 
provisions of Paragraphs VIII A, Civil Rights, and B, Affirmative Action, in every subcontract or purchase order, specifically or by reference, so that such provisions will be binding upon each sub-Subrecipient or vendor. 
c. Employment Restrictions 
(1) Prohibited Activity. The Subrecipient is prohibited from using funds 
provided herein or personnel employed in the administration of the program for political activities; sectarian, or religious activities; lobbying, political patronage, and nepotism activities. 
(2) OSHA. Where employees are engaged in activities not covered under the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, they shall not be required or permitted to work, be trained, or receive services in buildings or surroundings or under working conditions which are unsanitary, hazardous or dangerous to the participants' health or safety. 
d. "Section 3" Clause 
(1) Compliance. Compliance with the provisions of Section 3, the 
regulations set forth in 24 CFR 135, and all applicable rules and orders issued hereunder prior to the execution of this agreement and binding upon the City of Vista, the Subrecipient and any sub­Subrecipients. Failure to fulfill these requirements shall subject the City of Vista, the Subrecipient and any sub-Subrecipients, their successors and assigns, to those sanctions specified by the agreement through which federal assistance is provided. The Subrecipient certifies and agrees that no contractual or other disability exists which would prevent compliance with these requirements. 
The Subrecipient further agrees to comply with these "Section 3" requirements and to include the following language in all subcontracts executed under this agreement: 
The work to be performed under this agreement is a project assisted under a program providing direct federal financial assistance from HUD and is subject to the requirements of Section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968, as amended, 12 
U.S.C. 1701. Section 3 requires that to the greatest extent feasible opportunities for training and employment be given to lower income residents of the Project area and contracts for work in connection with the Project be awarded to business concerns which are located in, or owned in substantial part by persons residing in the areas of the Project." 
The Subrecipient certifies and agrees that no contractual or other disability exists which would prevent compliance with the requirements. 
00090584 I 4 ALPHA PROJECT FOR THE HOMELESS 
(2) Notifications. The Subrecipient agrees to send to each labor 
organization or representative of workers with which it has a collective bargaining agreement or other contract or understanding, if any, a notice advising said labor organization or worker's representative of its commitments under this Section 3 clause and shall post copies of the notice in conspicuous places available to employees and applicants for employment or training. 
(3) Subcontracts. The Subrecipient will include this Section 3 clause 
in every subcontract and will take appropriate action pursuant to the subcontract upon a finding that the sub-Subrecipient is in violation of regulations issued by the grantor agency. The Subrecipient will not subcontract with any sub-Subrecipient where it has notice of knowledge that the latter has been found in violation of regulations under 24 CFR 135 and will not let any subcontract unless the sub-Subrecipient has first provided it with a preliminary statement of ability to comply with the requirements of these regulations. 
1.6 Further Responsibilities of Parties. Both parties agree to use reasonable care 
and diligence to perform their respective obligations under this Agreement. Both parties agree to act in good faith to execute all instruments, prepare all documents, and take all actions as may be reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of this Agreement. Unless hereafter specified, neither party shall be responsible for the obligations of the other. 




2.0 DISBURSEMENT OF CDBG FUNDS 
2.1 Maximum Amount of CDBG Funds. The maximum amount of CDBG funds to be provided to Subrecipient is $17,872. Subrecipient hereby acknowledges that the City cannot guarantee that the CDBG funds will be received from HUD. The City's obligation to fund the work hereunder is limited to the availability of CDBG funds from HUD. If the CDBG funds are not forthcoming from HUD for any reason, the City shall not have any obligation to fund the work through any other source of funds. 
2.2 Method of Payment. Unless otherwise specified in Exhibit "A", at least quarterly, 
Subrecipient shall submit to the Contract Officer an invoice, in a form acceptable to the City, setting forth the value of the services and the amounts or reimbursable expenses actually incurred by Subrecipient for the Project; provided that said services or expenses are included in the budget (Exhibit "B") and performance standards have been met. Said invoice shall, at a minimum, set forth each budget category for which payment is sought, a description of the services or expense, the total budgeted amount for the category, the amount requested to be paid for each budget category, and the total amount expended for each budget category to date. Said invoice shall be accompanied with such additional supporting information as requested by the City, including, but not limited to, paid receipts for each expense. To the extent the CDBG funds actually have been received from HUD, the City shall pay Subrecipient for all services and expenses stated on the invoice which are approved by City pursuant to this Agreement no later than the thirtieth day after the invoice is received. 
2.3 Program Income. Any program income, as such term is defined in the regulations, received by Subrecipient shall be retained by Subrecipient. The program income received by Subrecipient shall solely be used for the Project or for the purpose of operating the facility. All provisions of this Agreement shall apply to activities funded by program income. All program income shall be expended by Subrecipient before the City is obligated to advance any other CDBG funds to Subrecipient under this Agreement. Program income and expenditures shall be reported to the City at least quarterly. 
OIJll905ij4 I 5 ALPHA PROJECT FOR THE HOMELESS 

2.4 Separation of Funds. The Subrecipient shall certify that the Subrecipient's 
financial system is in accordance with the standards specified in 2 CFR Part 200 -"Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards." 

2.5 Indirect Costs. If indirect costs are charged, the Subrecipient will develop an 
indirect cost allocation plan for determining the appropriate City of Vista share of administrative costs and shall submit such plan to the City of Vista for approval. 


3.0 PERFORMANCE SCHEDULE 
3.1 Schedule of Performance. Subrecipient shall commence, prosecute and 
complete the Project within the time periods established in the "Statement of Work" attached hereto as Exhibit "A" and incorporated herein by this reference. 

3.2 Term. Unless earlier terminated in accordance with Section 7.4 of this Agreement, 
the term of this Agreement shall be from July 1, 2020 to June 30, 2021. 

3.3 Reversion of Assets. Upon the expiration or sooner termination of this 
Agreement, Subrecipient shall (i) transfer to the City any and all unearned CDBG funds and program income on hand (ii) any accounts receivable attributable to the use of CDBG funds or program income; and (iii) if any CDBG funds or program income was used by Subrecipient to improve or acquire real property and said CDBG funds or program income was in excess of $25,000, Subrecipient shall either (a) use said real property to meet one of the national objectives specified in 24 CFR Section 570.208 for a period of five years after the termination or sooner expiration of this Agreement or (b) dispose of the real property and reimburse the City in an amount (together with any amounts previously repaid to the City) that is equal to the fair market value of the real property times a fraction, the numerator of which is equal to the amount of CDBG funds and/or other program income used to acquire or improve the property and denominator of which is equal to the fair market value of the real property immediately after the real property was acquired or improved with said funds. 


4.0 COORDINATION OF WORK 
4.1 Representative of Subrecipient. The Executive Director is hereby designated as being the representative of Subrecipient authorized to act in its behalf with respect to this Agreement and make all decisions in connection therewith. 
4.2 Contract Officer. Contract Officer shall be the City's CDBG Administrator or such 
person as may be designated by the City Manager. It shall be the Subrecipient's responsibility to assure that the Contract Officer is kept informed of the progress of the performance of the services and the Subrecipient shall refer any decisions that must be made by City to the Contract Officer. Unless otherwise specified herein, any approval of City required hereunder shall mean the approval of the Contract Officer. The Contract Officer shall have authority to sign all documents on behalf of the City required hereunder to carry out the terms of this Agreement. 
4.3 Prohibition Against Subcontracting or Assignment. Neither this Agreement nor any interest herein may be transferred, assigned, conveyed, hypothecated or encumbered voluntarily or by operation of law, whether for the benefit of creditors or otherwise, without the prior written approval of City. Transfers restricted hereunder shall include the transfer to any person or group of persons acting in concert of more than 25% of the present ownership and/or control of Subrecipient, taking all transfers into account on a cumulative basis. In the event of any 
00090584 I 6 ALPHA PROJECT FOR THE HOMELESS 
such unapproved transfer, including any bankruptcy proceeding, this Agreement shall be void. No approved transfer shall release the Subrecipient or any surety of Subrecipient of any liability hereunder without the express consent of City. 

4.4 Independent Contractor. Neither the City nor any of its employees shall have 
any control over the manner, mode or means by which Subrecipient, its agents or employees, perform the services required herein, except as otherwise set forth herein. City shall have no voice in the selection, discharge, supervision or control of Subrecipient's employees, servants, representatives or agents, or in fixing their number, compensation or hours of service. Subrecipient shall perform all services required herein as an independent contractor of City and shall remain at all times as to City a wholly independent contractor with only such obligations as are consistent with the role. Subrecipient shall not at any time or in any manner represent that it or any of its agents or employees are agents or employees of City. City shall not in any way or for any purpose become or be deemed to be a partner of Subrecipient in its business or otherwise of a joint venture or a member of any joint enterprise with Subrecipient. 

4.5 Conflict of Interest. The Subrecipient agrees to abide by the provisions of 24 
CFR 570.61e1 with respect to conflicts of interest, and covenants that it presently has no financial interest and shall not acquire any financial interest, direct or indirect, which would conflict in any manner or degree with the performance of services required under this Agreement. The Subrecipient further covenants that in the performance of this Agreement no persons having such a financial interest shall be employed or retained by the Subrecipient hereunder. These conflict of interest provisions apply to any person who is an employee, agent, consultant, officer, or elected official or appointed official of the City of Vista, or of any designated public agencies or subrecipients which are receiving funds under the CDBG Entitlement program. 

4.6 Lobbying. The Subrecipient hereby certifies that: 
a. No Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid, by or on behalf of it, to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress in connection with the awarding of any Federal contract, the making of any Federal grant, the making of any Federal loan, the entering into of any cooperative agreement, and the extension, continuation, renewal, amendment, or modification of any Federal contract, grant, loan, or co-operative agreement; 
b. If any funds other than Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will 
be paid to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress in connection with this Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement, it will complete and submit Standard Form-LLL, "Disclosure Form to Report Lobbying," in accordance with its instructions; 
c. It will require that the language of paragraph (d) of this certification be included in the award documents for all subawards at all tiers (including subcontracts, subgrants, and contracts under grants, loans, and cooperative agreements) and that all subrecipients shall certify and disclose accordingly; and 
d. Lobbying Certification Language -This certification is a material representation of fact upon which reliance was placed when this transaction was made or entered into. Submission of this certification is a prerequisite for making or entering into this transaction 
00090584 I 7 ALPHA PROJECT FOR THE HOMELESS 
imposed by section 1353, title 31, U.S. Code. Any person who fails to file the required certification shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $10,000 and not more than $100,000 for each such failure. 


5.0 INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION 
5.1 Insurance. Subrecipient agrees to defend, indemnify and save harmless City, its officers, agents, and employees from and against any and all claims, demands, losses, defense costs, or liability of any kind or nature which the City, its officers, agents, and employees may sustain or incur or which may be imposed upon them for injury to or death of persons, or damage to property as a result of arising out of, or in any manner connected with Subrecipient's performance under the terms of this Agreement, excepting only liability arising out of the sole negligence of the City. This indemnity shall survive the termination of this Agreement. 
Without limiting Subrecipient's indemnification, it is agreed that Subrecipient shall maintain in force at all times during the performance of this Agreement the following policy or policies or insurance covering its operations: 
a. Comprehensive General Liability, including Contractual Liability, products 
and completed operations liability, and Business Automobile liability, all of which shall include both bodily injury and property damage, with a combined single limit of $2,000,000.00. 
b. Workers' Compensation insurance as required by the State of California, 
with Statutory Limits, and Employers' Liability insurance with a limit of no less than $1,000,000 per accident for bodily injury or disease. Subrecipient's liability insurance policy shall contain the following clauses: 
1. The City of Vista is named as additional insured as respects 
operations of the named insured performed under contract with the City; and 
2. It is agreed that any insurance maintained by the City shall apply in 
excess of and not contribute with, insurance provided by this policy; 
3. All insurance policies required by this paragraph shall contain the 
following clause: This insurance shall not be canceled, limited or non-renewed until after 30 days written notice has been given to the City. 
Certificates of insurance evidencing the coveragerequired by the clauses set forth above shall be filed with the City prior to the effective date of this Agreement. This is a condition precedent to the formation of any obligation by the City to compensate Subrecipient under this Agreement. 
6.0 ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS 
6.1 Financial Management. 
200 -"Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards" and agrees to adhere to the accounting principles and procedures required therein, utilize adequate internal controls, and maintain necessary source documentation for all costs incurred. 

00090584 I 8 ALPHA PROJECT FOR THE HOMELESS 
b. Cost Principes. The Subrecipient shall administer its program in
l

conformance with 2 CFR Part 200 -"Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards," as applicable for all costs incurred whether charged on a direct or indirect basis. 
6.2 Documentation and Record-Keeping 
a. Records to be Maintained. The Subrecipient shall maintain all records r'equired by the Federal regulations specific in 24 CFR Part 570.506, and that are pertinent to the activities to be funded under this Agreement. Such records shall include but not be limited to: 
(2) 

Records providing a full description of each activity undertaken; 
Records demonstrating that each activity undertaken meets one of 
the National Objectives of the CDBG program; 
(3) 
Records required to determine the eligibility of activities; 

(4) 
Records required to document the acquisition, improvement, use or 


disposition of real property acquired or improved with CDBG assistance; 
(5) Records documenting compliance with the fair housing and equal 
opportunity components of the CDBG program; 
(6) Financial records as required by 24 CFR Part 570.502, and 2 CFR 
Part 200; and 
Other records necessary to document compliance with Subpart K 
of 24 CFR 570. 
b. Retention. The Subrecipient shall retain all records pertinent to expenditures incurred under this Agreement for a period of five years after the termination of all activities funded under this Agreement, or after the resolution of all Federal audit findings, whichever occurs later. Records for non-expendable property acquired with funds under this Agreement shall be retained for five years after final disposition of such property. Records for any displaced person must be kept for five years after he/she has received final payment. 
6.3 Client Data. The Subrecipient shall maintain client data demonstrating client 
eligibility for services provided. Such data shall include, but not be limited to, client name, address, income level or other basis for determining eligibility, and description of service provided. Such information shall be made available to City of Vista monitors or their designees for review upon request. 
6.4 Disclosure. The Subrecipient understands that client information collected under this Agreement is private and the use or disclosure of such information, when not directly connected with the administration of the City of Vista's or Subrecipient's responsibilities with respect to services provided under this Agreement, is prohibited by law unless written consent is obtained from such person receiving service and, in the case of a minor, that of a responsible parent/guardian. 
000905.4 I 9 ALPHA PROJECT FOR THE HOMELESS 

6.5 Property Records. The Subrecipient shall maintain real property inventory 
records which clearly identify properties purchased, improved or sold. Properties retained shall continue to meet eligibility criteria and shall conform with the "changes in use" restrictions specified in 24 CFR Parts 570.503(b)(8). 

6.6 National Objectives. The Subrecipient agrees to maintain documentation that 
demonstrates that the activities carried out with funds provided under this Agreement meet one or more of the CDBG program's national objectives: (a) benefit low/moderate income persons, (b) aid in lhe prevenlion or elimination of slums or blight, (c) meet community development needs having a particular urgency (as defined in 24 CFR Part 570.208). 

6.7 Performance Monitoring. The City of Vista will monitor the performance of the 
Subrecipient against goals and performance standards required herein. Substandard performance as determined by the City of Vista will constitute non-compliance with this Agreement. If action to correct such substandard performance is not taken by the Subrecipient within a reasonable period of time after being notified by the City of Vista, contract suspension or termination procedures will be initiated. 

6.8 Close-Outs. Subrecipient obligation to the City of Vista shall not end until all close­
out requirements are completed. Activities during this close-out period shall include, but are not limited to: making final payments, disposing of program assets (including the return of all unused materials, equipment, unspent cash advances, program income balances, and receivable accounts to the City of Vista), and determining the custodianship of records. 

6.9 Audits and Inspections. All Subrecipient records with respect to any matters 
covered by this Agreement shall be made available to the City of Vista, grantor agency, their designees or the Federal Government, at any time during normal business hours, as often as the City of Vista or grantor agency deems necessary, to audit, examine, and make excerpts or transcripts of all relevant data. Any deficiencies noted in audit reports must be fully cleared by the Subrecipient within 30 days after receipt by the Subrecipient. Failure of the Subrecipient to comply with the above audit requirements will constitute a violation of this Agreement and may result in the withholding of future payments. The Subrecipient hereby agrees to have an annual agency audit conducted in accordance with current City policy concerning Subrecipient audits. 


7.0 ENFORCEMENT OF AGREEMENT 

7.1 Applicable Law. This Agreement shall be construed and interpreted both as to validity and to performance of the parties in accordance with the laws of the State of California and the United States, as applicable. Legal actions concerning any dispute, claim or matter arising out of or in relation to this Agreement shall be instituted in the Superior Court of the County of San Diego, State of California, the United States District Court for the San Diego District of California, or any other appropriate court in San Diego County, and Subrecipient covenants and agrees to submit to the personal jurisdiction of such court in the event of such action. 
7.2 Disputes. In the event of any dispute arising under this Agreement, the party claiming an injury shall notify the other party in writing of its contentions by submitting a claim therefor. The party claiming an injury shall continue performing its obligations hereunder so long as the other party commences to cure such default within ten days of service of such notice and completes the cure of such default within 30 days after service of the notice, or such longer period as may be permitted by the injured party; provided that if the default is an immediate danger to 
00090584 I 10 ALPHA PROJECT FOR THE HOMELESS 
c.  Wholly or partially suspend or terminate the award and this Agreement;  
d.  Withhold further awards for the Project and/or the facility; and  
e.  Require Subrecipient to repay any CDBG funds which the City determines  

the health, safety and general welfare, such immediate action may be necessary. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City may suspend any further payment of CDBG funds until Subrecipient is in full compliance with this Agreement. Compliance with the provisions of this Section shall be a condition precedent to termination of this Agreement for cause and to any legal action, and such compliance shall not be a waiver of any party's right to take legal action in the event that the depute is not cured. 
7.3 Remedies Upon Default by Subrecipient. In addition to any other rights or remedies available at law or in equity, if Subrecipient fails to fulfill its obligations under this Agreement, City may, after compliance with the provisions of Section 7.2: 
a. Temporarily withhold payment of CDBG funds pending correction of the 
default by Subrecipient; 
b. Refuse to advance all or any part of the CDBG funds for the Project and 
reallocate said funds to another activity; 
were not expended in compliance with the requirements of this Agreement, the Act or the regulations. 
7.4 Termination. 

a. For Cause. The City may terminate the Agreement in whole, or in part, whenever the City determines that the Subrecipient has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of the Agreement. 
b. For Convenience.The Parties may terminate the Agreement in whole, or in part, when all parties agree that the continuation of the Project would not produce beneficial results commensurate with the future disbursement of funds. 
c. Due to Reduction or Termination of CDBG Funding.At the sole discretion of the City, the Agreement may be terminated in whole, or in part, if there is a reduction or termination of CDBG Federal block grant funds to the City. 
7.5 Waiver. No delay or omission in the exercise of any right or remedy by a nondefaulting party on any default shall impair such right or remedy or be construed as a waiver. A party's consent to or approval of any act by the other party requiring the party's consent or approval shall not be deemed to waive or render unnecessary the other party's consent to or approval of any subsequent act. Any waiver by either party of any default must be in writing and shall not be a waiver of any other default concerning the same or any other provision of this Agreement. 
7.6 Rights and Remedies are Cumulative. Except with respect to rights and remedies expressly declared to be exclusive in this Agreement, the rights and remedies of the parties are cumulative and the exercise by either party of one or more of such rights or remedies 
OOOY05X4 I 11 ALPHA PROJECT FOR THE HOMELESS 
shall not preclude the exercise by it, at the same or different times, of any other rights or remedies for the same default or any other default by the other party. 

7.7 Legal Action. In addition to any other rights or remedies, either party may take 
legal action, in law or in equity, to cure, correct or remedy any default, to recover damages for any default, to complete specific performance of this Agreement, to obtain declaratory or injunctive relief, or to obtain any other remedy consistent with the purposes of the Agreement. 

7.8 Attorneys' Fees. If either party to this Agreement is required to initiate or defend 
or made a party to any action or proceeding in any way connected with this Agreement, the prevailing party in such action or proceeding, in addition to any other relief which may be granted, whether legal or equitable, shall be entitled to reasonable attorney's fees. Attorney fees shall include attorney's fees on any appeal, and in addition a party entitled to attorney's fees shall be entitled to all other reasonable costs for investigating such action, taking depositions and discovery and all other necessary costs the court allows which are incurred in such litigation. All such fees shall be deemed to have accrued on commencement of such action and shall be enforceable whether or not such action is prosecuted to judgement. 


8.0 CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
8.1 Non-liability of City Officers and Employees. No officer or employee of the City 
shall be personally liable to the Subrecipient, or any successor in interest, in the event of any default or breach by the City or for any amount which may become due to the Subrecipient or to its successor, or for breach of any obligation of the terms of this Agreement. 
8.2 Conflict of Interest. No officer or employee of the City shall have any financial 
interest, direct or indirect, in this Agreement nor shall any such officer or employee participate in any decision relating to the Agreement which affects his financial interest or the financial interest of any corporation, partnership or association in which he is, directly or indirectly, interested, in violation of any State statute or regulation. The Subrecipient warrants that it has not paid or given and will not pay or give any third party any money or other consideration for obtaining this Agreement. 

8.3 Compliance with Code. Subrecipient agrees that, to the extent applicable, it shall 
comply with and be bound by all laws and regulations deriving from the relationship of the Subrecipient to the City, including the Political Reform Act (Government Codes Section 87100 et seq.) Chapters 2.32 or 2.33 of the Vista Municipal Code, the Community Redevelopment Act (Health & Safety Code 33000 et seq.) and all regulations promulgated thereunder (collectively "Conflict Laws"). As a condition precedent to the formation of this Agreement, Consultant warrants and covenants that it is adequately informed regarding the obligations and duties imposed by the Conflict Laws and that to the best of Subrecipient's knowledge and belief, there exists no conflict of interest (under the laws} that would disqualify the Subrecipient from participation in any decisions arising out of the performance of this Agreement. Prior to commencement of any work in the performance of this Agreement, Subrecipient shall comply with any applicable requirements of Chapter 2.32 of the Vista Municipal Code, including any requirement to file a financial disclosure statement with the City Clerk. Subrecipient further agrees that no employee, agent or subcontractor for Subrecipient shall perform any work for the City pursuant to this Contract which will violate the Conflict Laws. 
ll0090584 I 12 ALPHA PROJECT FOR THE HOMELESS 
9.0 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

9.1 Notice. Any notice, demand, request, document, consent, approval, or communication either party desires or is required to give to the other party or any other person shall be in writing and either served personally or sent by prepaid first-class mail. Any change to the Subrecipient address must be made in writing. Notice shall be deemed communicated at the time personally delivered or in 72 hours from the time of mailing if mailed as provided in this 
Section.  
To the City:  City of Vista 200 Civic Center Drive Vista, California 92084 Attention: CDBG Program Administrator  
To the Subrecipient:  Alpha Project for the Homeless 3737 Fifth Avenue, Suite 203 San Diego, CA 92103 Attn: Executive Director  

9.2 Interpretation. The terms of this Agreement shall be construed in accordance with the meaning of the language used and shall not be construed for or against either party by reason of the authorship of this Agreement or any other rule of construction which might otherwise apply. 
9.3 Integration; Amendment. It is understood that there are no oral agreements between the parties hereto affecting this Agreement and this Agreement supersedes and cancels any and all previous negotiations, arrangements, agreements and understandings, if any, between the parties, and none shall be used to interpret this Agreement. This Agreement may be amended at any time by the mutual consent of the parties by an instrument in writing. 
9.4 Severability. In the event that any one or more of the phrases, sentences, clauses, paragraphs, or sections contained in this Agreement shall be declared invalid or unenforceable by a valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, sentences, clauses, paragraphs, or sections of this Agreement that are hereby declared as severable and shall be interpreted to carry out the intent of the parties hereunder unless the invalid provision is so material that its invalidity deprives either party of the basic benefit of their bargain or renders this Agreement meaningless. 
9.5 Corporate Authority. The persons executing this Agreement on behalf of the parties hereby warrant that (i) such party is duly organized and existing, (ii) they are duly authorized to execute and deliver this Agreement on behalf of said party, (iii) by so executing this Agreement, such party is formally bound to the provisions of this Agreement. 
9.6. Nationality Act. Consultant hereby promises and agrees to comply with all of the 
provisions of the Federal Immigration and Nationality Act, 8 U.S.C.A. §1101, et seq., as amended, and in connection therewith, shall not employ unauthorized aliens as defined therein. Consultant hereby promises and agrees to comply with all of the provisions of the Federal Immigration and Nationality Act, 8 U.S.C.A. §1101, et seq., as amended, and in connection therewith, shall not employ unauthorized aliens as defined therein. Should Subrecipient so employ such unauthorized aliens for the performance of work and/or services covered by this Agreement, and 
00090584 I 13 ALPHA PROJECT FOR THE HOMELESS 
should any liability or sanctions be imposed against City for such use of unauthorized aliens, Subrecipient hereby agrees to and shall reimburse City for the cost of all such liabilities or sanctions imposed, together with any and all costs, including attorneys' fees, incurred by City. 
9.7 Counterparts. This Agreement may be executed in two or more counterparts, each of which shall be deemed an original but all of which together shall constitute one and the same instrument. 
9.8 Execution. IN WITNESS WHEREOF; the Parties hereto have executed this Contract as 
of the Contract Date. 
CITY OF VISTA, a chartered municipal ALPHA PROJECT FO THE HOMELESSa corporation California nonprofit c 
By . By:___ --+#-_ 
----­
pARICKJOH$0N,CITYMANAGER 







{( obevr 

ATTEST: NAME/TITLE 

KATHYVALDEZ,CITYCLERK 


APPROVED-.-
y 

Daro d Pieper
l 
20200903151757 
000?0584 I 14 ALPHA PROJECT FOR THE HOMELESS 
EXHIBIT A 
STATEMENT OF WORK 
Subrecipient: Alpha Project for the Homeless 
Address: 3737 5th Ave., Suite 203, San Diego, CA 92103 Contact Person: Bob McElroy, Executive Director 
Phone: 619.542.1877 
Project Name: Homeless Outreach Program 

PROJECT GOALS AND OBJECTIVES 
Goal: Assist individuals and families to end their homelessness. 
Objective: Connect with homeless men, women and families to conduct comprehensive assessments, link homeless persons to housing navigation and other supports. 

PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
1. 
By June 30, 2021, a minimum of 100 homeless households will be assessed. 

2. 
By June 30, 2021, a minimum of 15-20 persons/households will be placed in housing appropriate for their needs. 



REPORTING AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS 
3. 
Submit performance reports quarterly, by the 15th day of the month following the end of the reporting period (October, January, April, and July). Reporting forms provided by the City must be utilized. Quarterly reports must be submitted regardless of whether any activity took place during the reporting period. 

4. 
Submit expenditure reports and reimbursement requests quarterly, by the 15th day of the month following the end of the reporting period (October, January, April, and July). Expenditure and reimbursement request forms provided by the City must be utilized. Backup documentation for all expenditures must be included. Quarterly reports must be submitted regardless of whether any funds were expended during the reporting period. 

5. 
Ensure program/agency information is included on 211 San Diego. 


00090584 I 15 ALPHA PROJECT FOR THE HOMELESS 
EXHIBIT B  
BUDGET  
Subrecipient:  Alpha Project for the Homeless  
Address:  3737 5th Ave., Suite 203, San Diego, CA 92103  
Contact Person:  Bob McElroy, Executive Director  
Phone:  619.542.1877  
Project Name:  Homeless Outreach Program  

Budget Category  Amount  
a. Salaries and Wages b. Fringe Benefits C. Consultant/Contract Services  $14,297.60 $3,574.40 $0.00 $17,872.00  
Total Personnel Budget  
d. Office Rent  $0.00  
e. Utilities  $0.00  
f. Telephone  $0.00  
g. Office Supplies  $0.00  
h. Equipment  $0.00  
i. Printing/Duplication  $0.00 $0.00 
j. Travel/Conferences  
k. Other (Food and Meal Containers)  $0.00  
Total Non-Personnel Budget  $0.00  

TOTAL PROJECT BUDGET $17,872.00 
00090584 I 16 ALPHA PROJECT FOR THE HOMELESS 

® DATE (MM/DDNYYYI
ACORD 


CERTIFICATE OF LIABILITY INSURANCE 
. 9/1/2020
I 

THIS CERTIFICATE IS ISSUED AS A MATTER OF INFORMATION ONLY AND CONFERS NO RIGHTS UPON THE CERTIFICATE HOLDER. THIS 
CERTIFICATE DOES NOT AFFIRMATIVELY OR NEGATIVELY AMEND, EXTEND OR ALTER THE COVERAGE AFFORDED BY THE POLICIES 
BELOW. THIS CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE DOES NOT CONSTITUTE A CONTRACT BETWEEN THE ISSUING INSURER($), AUTHORIZED 
REPRESENTATIVE OR PRODUCER, AND THE CERTIFICATE HOLDER. 

IMPORTANT: If the certificate holder is an ADDITIONAL INSURED, the policy(ies) must be endorsed. If SUBROGATION IS WAIVED, subject to 
the terms and conditions of the policy, certain policies may require an endorsement. A statement on this certificate does not confer rights to the 
certificate holder in lieu of such endorsement(s). 
PRODUCER 
NAME7 "" John Abbo 
CMR Risk & Insurance Services PHONE (619) 297-3160 IFAX 
/A/C No Ext\: (A/C No): 
MA:oDR
INSURER(Sl AFFORDRNG COVERAGE
IR

INSURER A: Philadelphia Indemnity Ins Company 
INSURER O: Service Amor.ican IndGJ.nnity Cumpa.ny 
INSURER C: 
INSURER D: 
INSURER E: 
INSURER FR: 
(619> 297-3111 

License #OE59760 110 W A Street, Ste. 725 
NAIC # 
18058San Diego CA 92101 
IN.llREO 
39152 
1,000,000 
100,000 
5,000 1,000,000 2,000,000 2,000,000 
1,000,000 
5,000,000 
5,000,000 
1,000,000 
1,000,000 
1000000 
$1,000,000 
$2,000,000 
Alpha Project for the Homeless 
3737 5th Avenue 
Suite 203 
San Diego CA 92103 




COVERAGES CERTIFICATE NUMBER: CL2082616799 REVISION NUMBER: 
THIS IS TO CERTIFY THAT THE POLICIES OF INSURANCE LISTED BELOW HAVE BEEN ISSUED TO THE INSURED NAMED ABOVE FOR THE POLICY PERIOD 
INDICATED. NOTWTHSTANDING ANY REQUIREMENT, TERM OR CONDITION OF ANY CONTRACT OR OTHER DOCUMENT WRTH RESPECT TO WHICH THIS 
IIR
CERTIFICATE MAY BE ISSUED OR MAY PERTAIN, THE INSURANCE AFFORDED BY THE POLICIES DESCRIBED HEREIN IS SUBJECT TO ALL THE TERMS, 
EXCLUSIONS AND CONDITIONS OF SUCH POLICIES. LIMITS SHOWN MAY HAVE BEEN REDUCED BY PAID CLAIMS. 
INSR  ADDL SUBR "···­ POLICY EFF  POLICY EXP  
LTR A  TYPE OF INSURANCE X COMMERCIALGENERAL LIABILITY-D CLAIMS-MADE woccuR -- ....._  POLICY NUMBER PHPK2175575  IfMM/ODNYYYl 09/01/2020  fMM/ODNYYYl 09/01/2021  LIMITS EACH OCCURRENCE g..j.iJ.:aE...?rence\ MED EXP (Any one person) PERSONAL & ADV INJURY  s s s s  
GEN'LAGGREGATE LIMIT APPLIES PER: POLICY D .:g 0 LOCR  GENERAL AGGREGATE PRODUCTS-COMP/OPAGG  s s  
OTHER:  s  
A  AUTOMOBILE LIABILITY-X-ANY AUTO ALL OWNED .SCHEDULED AUTOS AUTOS --NON-OWNEO-HIREOAUTOS AUTOS  PHPK2175575  09/01/2020  09/01/2021  COMBINED SIRNGLE LIMIT {Ea accident) BODILY INJURY (Per person) BODILY INJURY (Per accident) PROPERTY DAMAGE !Per accident!  s s s s  
s  
X UMBRELLA LIAB OCCUR-H EACH OCCURRENCE  s  
A  EXCESS LIAS CLAIMS-MADE OED IXIRETENTIRON s 10,000 WORKERS COMPENSATION AND EMPLOYERS' LIABILITY YIN ANY PROPRIETOR/PARTNER/EXECUTIVE OFFICER/MEMBER EXCLUDED? NIA.(Mandatory in NH)  PHUB736715 SATIS0022600  09/01/2020 6/30/2020  09/01/2021 6/30/2021  AGGREGATE X I ..frurE I IOTH• ER E.L. EACH ACCIDENT E.L. DISEASE· EA EMPLOYEE  s s s s  
If yes, describe under DESCRIPTION OF OPERATIONS below  E.RL DISEASE • POLIRCY LIMIT  s  
A  PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY  PHPK2175575  09/01/2020  09/01/2021  EACH PROFESSIONAL INCDENTI 

AGGREGATE LIMIT 


DESCRIPTION OF OPERATIONS/ LOCATIONS IVEHICLES (ACORD 101, Additional Remal'ks Schedule, may be attached if more space is required) 
RE: Operations of the named insured. 
CERTIFICATE HOLDER CANCELLATION 
City of Vista 200 Civic Center Dr Vista, CA 92084 I  SHOULD ANY OF THE ABOVE DESCRIBED POLICIES BE CANCELLED BEFORE THE EXPIRATION DATE THEREOF, NOTICE WILL BE DELIVERED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PORLICY PROVISIONS. AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE John Abbo/JOHNA i .,  
© 1988-2014 ACORD CORPORATION. All rights reserved. ACORD 25 (2014/01) The ACORD name and logo are registered marks of ACORD 


INS025 (201401) 


REPRESENTATIVE OR PRODUCER, AND THE CERTIFICATE HOLDER. 
ACORD® 
110 WAStreet,  Ste.  725  
San Diego  CA  92101  
INSUHLU  


certificate holder in lieu of such endorsement(s). 
PRODUCER 
CMR Risk & Insurance Services License #OE59760 
Alpha Project for the Homeless 3737 5th Avenue Suite 203 San Diego CA 92103 POLICY EFF POLICY EXP LIMITSPOLICY NUMBER IMMIDD/YYYYI IMMIDD/YYYYI EACH OCCURRENCE s 1,000,000 
DAMAuE TuKcN,.v 100,000PREMISES {Ea occurrence) s 09/01/2020 09/01/2021 MED EXP (Any one pe,son) s 5,000 

PERSONAL & ADV INJURY s 1,000,000 
-


CERTIFICATE HOLDER CANCELLATION 

SHOULD ANY OF THE ABOVE DESCRIBED POLICIES BE CANCELLED BEFORE 
THE EXPIRATION DATE THEREOF, NOTICE WILL BE DELIVERED IN 
City of Vista 
ACCORDANCE WITH THE POLICY PROVISIONS. 
Public Works Department 200 Civic Center Dr. 
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE

Vista, CA 92084-6240 
John Abbe/JOHNA -<,. ..,. 
I 


© 1988-2014 ACORD CORPORATION. All rights reserved, ACORD 25 (2014/01) The ACORD name and logo are registered marks of ACORD 
INS025 (201401) 

COMMENTS/REMARKS 
provisions . 
OFREMARK COPYRIGHT 2000, AMS SERVICES INC. 
THIS ENDORSEMENT CHANGES THE POLICY. PLEASE READ IT CAREFULLY. 
GENERAL LIABILITY DELUXE ENDORSEMENT: 


HUMAN SERVICES 
This endorsement modifies insurance provided under the following: 
COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY COVERAGE 
It is understood and agreed that the following extensions only apply in the event that noother specific coverage for the indicated loss exposure is provided under this policy. If such specific coverage applies, the terms, conditions and limitsof that coverage are the sole and exclusive coverage applicable under this policy, unless otherwise noted on this endorsement. The following is a summary of the Limits of Insurance and additional coverages provided by this endorsement.For complete details on specfic coverages, consult the policy contract wording. 
i 

Coverage Applicable 
Limit of Insurance 
Page # 

Extended Property Damage 
Included 
2 

Limited Rental Lease Agreement Contractual Liability 
2
$50,000 limit 

Non-Owned Watercraft 
2
Less than 58 feet 

Damage to Property You Own, Rent, or Occupy 
$30,000 limit 
2 

Damage to Premises Rented to You 
$1,000,000 
3 

HIPAA 
4
Clarification 

Medical Payments 
$20,000 
5 

Medical Payments -Extended Reporting Period 
3 years 
5 

Athletic Activities 
Amended 
5 

Supplementary Payments -Bail Bonds 
$5,000 
5 

Supplementary Payment -Loss of Earnings 
$1,000 per day 
5 

Employee Indemnification Defense Coverage 
$25,000 
5 

Key and Lock Replacement -Janitorial Services Client Coverage 
$10,000 limit 
6 

Additional Insured -Newly Acquired Time Period 
Amended 
6 

Additional Insured -Medical Directors and Administrators 
Included 
7 

Additional Insured -Managers and Supervisors (with Fellow 
7
Included 

Emolovee Coveraae) 
Additional Insured -Broadened Named Insured 
Included 
7 

Additional Insured -Funding Source 
Included 
7 

Additional Insured -Home Care Providers 
Included 
7 

Additional Insured -Managers, Landlords, or Lessors of Premises Included 
7 

Additional Insured -Lessor of Leased Equipment 
Included 
7 

Additional Insured -Granter of Permits Included 8 
Additional Insured -Vendor 
Included 
8 

Additional Insured -Franchisor 
Included 
9 

Additional Insured -When Required by Contract 
Included 
9 

Additional Insured -Owners, Lessees, or Contractors Included 
9 

AdditionalInsured -State or Political Subdivisions Included 10 
Page 1 of 12 
Includes copyrighted material of Insurance Services Office, Inc., with its permission. © 201s1 Philadelphia Indemnity Insurance Company 
Duties in the Event of Occurrence, Claim or Suit  Included  10  
Unintentional Failure to Disclose Hazards  Included  10  
Transfer of Rights of Recovery Against Others To Us  Clarification  10  
Liberalization  Included  11  
Bodily Injury ­includes Mental Anguish  Included  11  
Personal and Advertising Injury ­includes Abuse of Process,  Included  11  
Discrimination  

A. Extended Property Damage 
SECTION I -COVERAGES, COVERAGE A BODILY INJURY AND PROPERTY DAMAGE LIABILITY, Subsection 2. Exclusions, Paragraph a. is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following: 


Expected or Intended Injury 

"Bodily injury'' or property damage" expected or intended from the standpoint of the insured. This exclusion does not apply to "bodily injury" or "property damage" resulting from the use of reasonable force to protect persons or property. 
B. Limited Rental Lease Agreement Contractual Liability 
SECTION I -COVERAGES, COVERAGE A. BODILY INJURY AND PROPERTY DAMAGE LIABILITY, Subsection 2. Exclusions, Paragraph b. Contractual Liability is amended to include the following: 
(3) Based on the named insured's request at the time of claim, we agree to indemnify the named insured for their liability assumed in a contract or agreement regarding the rental or lease of a premises on behalf of their client, up to $50,000. This coverage extension only applies to rental lease agreements. This coverage is excess over any renter's liability insurance of the client. 
C. Non-Owned Watercraft 

SECTION 1-COVERAGES, COVERAGE A BODILY INJURY AND PROPERTY DAMAGE LIABILITY, Subsection 2. Exclusions, Paragraph g. (2) is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following: 
(2) A watercraft you do not own that is: 

(a) 
Less than 58 feet long; and 


(b) 
Not being used to carry persons or property for a charge; 


This provision applies to any person, who with your consent, either uses or is responsible for the use of a watercraft. This insurance is excess over any other valid and collectible insurance available to the insured whether primary, excess or contingent. 
D. Damage to Property You Own, Rent or Occupy 
SECTION I -COVERAGES, COVERAGE A BODILY INJURY AND PROPERTY DAMAGE 
Page 2 of 12 
Includes copyrighted material of Insurance Services Office, Inc., wth its permission. 
i

© 2011 Philadelphia Indemnity Insurance Company 
LIABILITY, Subsection 2. Exclusions, Paragraph j. Damage to Property, Item (1) is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
(1) Property you own, rent, or occupy, including any costs or expenses incurred by you, or any other person, organization or entity, for repair, replacement, enhancement, restoration or maintenance of such property for any reason, including prevention of injury to a person or damage to another's property, unless the damage to property is caused by your client, up to a $30,000 limit. A client is defined as a person under your direct care and supervision. 
E. Damage to Premises Rented to You 
1. If damage by fire to premises rented to you is not otherwise excluded from this Coverage Part, the word "fire" is changed to "fire, lightning, explosion, smoke, or leakage from automatic fire protective systems" where it appears in: 
a. The last paragraph of SECTION I -COVERAGES, COVERAGE A BODILY INJURY AND PROPERTY DAMAGE LIABILITY, Subsection 2. Exclusions; is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following: 
Exclusions c. through n. do not apply to damage by fire, lightning, explosion, smoke, or leakage from automatic fire protective systems to premises while rented to you or temporarily occupied by you wth permission of the owner. A separate limit of insurance 
i

applies to this coverage as described in SECTION Ill -LIMITS OF INSURANCE. 
b. SECTION Ill -LIMITS OF INSURANCE, Paragraph 6. is deleted in its entirety and replaced 
by the following: 

Subject to Paragraph 5. above, the Damage To Premises Rented To You Limit is the most we will pay under Coverage A for damages because of "property damage" to any one premises, while rented to you, or in the case of damage by fire, lightning, explosion, smoke, or leakage from automatic fire protective systems while rented to you or temporarily occupied by you with permission of the owner. 
c. SECTION V -DEFINITIONS, Paragraph 9.a., is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the 
following: 

A contract for a lease of premises. However, that portion of the contract for a lease of premises that indemnifies any person or organization for damage by fire, lightning, explosion, smoke, or leakage from automatic fire protective systems to premises while rented to you or temporarily occupied by you with permission of the owner is not an "insured contract"; 
2. SECTION IV -COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY CONDITIONS, Subsection 4. Other Insurance, Paragraph b. Excess Insurance, (1) (a) (ii) is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following: 
That is insurance for fire, lightning, explosion, smoke, or leakage from automatic fire protective systems for premises rented to you or temporarily occupied by you with permission of the owner; 
3. The Damage To Premises Rented To You Limit section of the Declarations is amended to the greater of: 
Page 3 of 12 
Includes copyrighted material of Insurance Services Office, Inc., with its permission. © 2011 Philadelphia Indemnity Insurance Company 
a. $1s,000,000; or 

b. The amount shown in the Declarations as the Damage to Premises Rented to You Limit. 
This is the most we will pay for all damage proximately caused by the same event, whether such damage results from fire, lightning, explosion, smoke, or leaks from automatic fire protective systems or any combination thereof. 

F. HIPAA 
SECTION I -COVERAGES, COVERAGE B PERSONAL AND ADVERTISING INJURY LIABILITY, is amended as follows: 
1. 
Paragraph 1. Insuring Agreement is amended to include the following: 

We will pay those sums that the insured becomes legally obligated to pay as damages because of a "violation(s)" of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). We have the right and the duty to defend the insured against any "suit," "investigation," or "civil proceeding" seeking these damages. However, we will have no duty to defend the insured against any "suit" seeking damages, "investigation," or "civil proceeding" to which this insurance does not apply. 

2. 
Paragraph 2. Exclusions is amended to include the following additional exclusions: 


This insurance does not apply to: 
Intentional, Willful, or Deliberate Violations 

Any willful, intentional, or deliberate "violation(s)" by any insured. 
b. Criminal Acts 

Any "violation" which results in any criminal penalties under the HIPAA. 
c. Other Remedies 

Any remedy other than monetary damages for penalties assessed. 
d. Compliance Reviews or Audits 

Any compliance reviews by the Department of Health and Human Services. 
3. SECTION V -DEFINITIONS is amended to include the following additional definitions: 
a. 
"Civil proceeding" means an action by the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) arising out of "violations." 

b. 
"Investigation" means an examination of an actual or alleged "violation(s)" by HHS. However,"investigation" does not include a Compliance Review. 

c. 
"Violation" means the actual or alleged failure to comply with the regulations included in the HIPAA. 


Page 4 of 12 
Includes copyrighted material of Insurance Services Office, Inc., with its permission. © 201s1 Philadelphia Indemnity Insurance Company 
G. Medical Payments -Limit Increased to $20,000, Extended Reporting Period 
If COVERAGE C MEDICAL PAYMENTS is not otherwise excluded from this Coverage Part: 
1. The Medical Expense Limit is changed subject to all of the terms of SECTION Ill -LIMITS OF INSURANCE to the greater of: 
a. $20,000; or 

b. The Medical Expense Limit shown in the Declarations of this Coverage Part. 
2. SECTION I -COVERAGE, COVERAGE C MEDICAL PAYMENTS, Subsection 1. Insuring Agreement, a. (3) (b) is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following: 
(b) The expenses are incurred and reported to us within three years of the date of the accident. 
H. Athletic Activities 

SECTION 1-COVERAGES, COVERAGE C MEDICAL PAYMENTS, Subsection 2. Exclusions, Paragraph e. Athletic Activities is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
e. Athletic Activities 

To a person injured while taking part in athletics. 
I. Supplementary Payments 

SECTION 1-COVERAGES, SUPPLEMENTARY PAYMENTS -COVERAGE A AND Bsare amended as follows: 
1. b. is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following: 
b. Up to $5000 for cost of bail bonds required because of accidents or traffic law violations arising out of the use of any vehicle to which the Bodily Injury Liability Coverage applies. We do not have to furnish these. 
1.d. is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following: 
1. d. All reasonable expenses incurred by the insured at our request to assist us in the investigation or defense of the claim or "suit", including actual loss of earnings up to $1,000 a day because of time off from work. 
J. Employee Indemnification Defense Coverage 
SECTION I -COVERAGES, SUPPLEMENTARY PAYMENTS -COVERAGES A AND B the following is added: 
We will pay, on your behalf, defense costs incurred by an "employee" in a criminal proceeding occurring in the course of employment. 
The most we will pay for any "employee" who is alleged to be directly involved in a criminal proceeding is $25,000 regardless of the numbers of "employees," claims or "suits" brought or persons or organizations making claims or bringing "suits. 
Page 5 of 12 
Includes copyrighted material of Insurance Services Office, Inc., with its permission. © 201s1 Philadelphia Indemnity Insurance Company 
K. Key and Lock Replacement -Janitorial Services Client Coverage 

SECTION I -COVERAGES, SUPPLEMENTARY PAYMENTS -COVERAGES A AND Bis 
amended to include the following: 
We will pay for the cost to replace keys and locks at the "clients" premises due to theft or other loss to keys entrusted to you by your "client," up to a $10,000 limit per occurrence and $10,000 policy aggregate. 
We will not p;;iy for loss or damage resulting from theft or any other dishonest or criminal act that you or any of your partners, members, officers, "employees", "managers", directors, trustees, authorized representatives or any one to whom you entrust the keys of a "client" for any purpose commit, whether acting alone or in collusion with other persons. 
The following, when used on this coverage, are defined as follows: 
a. 
"Client" means an individual, company or organization with whom you have a written contract or work order for your services for a described premises and have billed for your services. 

b. 
"Employee" means: 


(1) 
Any natural person: 


(a) 
While in your service or for 30 days after termination of service; 

(b) 
Who you compensate directly by salary, wages or commissions; and 

(c) 
Who you have the right to direct and control while performing services for you; or 



(2) 
Any natural person who is furnished temporarily to you: 

(a) 
To substitute for a permanent "employee" as defined in Paragraph (1) above, who is on leave; or 

(b) 
To meet seasonal or short-term workload condstions;






iswhile that person is subject to your direction and control and performing services for you. 
(3) "Employee" does not mean: 

(a) 
Any agent, broker, person leased to you by a labor leasing firm, factor, commission merchant, consignee, independent contractor or representative of the same general character; or 

(b) 
Any "manager," director or trustee except while performing acts coming within the scope of the usual duties of an "employee." 


c. "Manager" means a person serving in a directorial capacity for a limited liability company. 
L. Additional Insureds 
SECTION II -WHO IS AN INSURED is amended as follows: 
If coverage for newly acquired or formed organizations is not otherwise excluded from this 
Page 6 of 12 Includes copyrighted material of Insurance Services Office, Inc., with its permission. © 201s1 Philadelphia Indemnity Insurance Company 
Coverage Part, Paragraph 3.a. is deleted in its entirely and replaced by the following: 
a. Coverage under this provision is afforded until the end of the policy period. 
2. Each of the following is also an insured: 
Medical Directors and Administrators -Your medical directors and administrators, but only while acting within the scope of and during the course of their duties as such. Such duties do not include the furnishing or failure to furnish professional services of any physician or psychiatrist in the treatment of a patient. 
b. Managers and Supervisors -Your managers and supervisors are also insureds, but only with respect to their duties as your managers and supervisors. Managers and supervisors who are your "employees" are also insureds for "bodily injury" to a co­"employee" while in the course of his or her employment by you or performing duties related to the conduct of your business. 
This provision does not change Item 2.a.(1 )(a) as t applies to managers of a limited 
i
liability company. 

c. 
Broadened Named Insured -Any organization and subsidiary thereof which you control and actively manage on the effective date of this Coverage Part. However, coverage does not apply to any organization or subsidiary not named in the Declarations as Named Insured, if they are also insured under another similar policy, but for its termination or the exhaustion of its limits of insurance. 

d. 
Funding Source -Any person or organization with respect to their liability arising out of: 

(1) 
Their financial control of you; or 


(2) 
Premises they own, maintain or control while you lease or occupy these premises. 




This insurance does not apply to structural alterations, new construction and demolition operations performed by or for that person or organization. 
e. 
Home Care Providers -At the first Named lnsured's option, any person or organization under your direct supervision and control while providing for you private home respite or foster home care for the developmentally disabled. 

f. 
Managers, Landlords, or Lessors of Premises -Any person or organization with respect to their liability arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of that part of the premises leased or rented to you subject to the following additional exclusions: 


This insurance does not apply to: 

(1) 
Any "occurrence" which takes place after you cease to be a tenant in that premises; or 

(2) 
Structural alterations, new construction or demolition operations performed by or on 


behalf of that person or organization. 

g. Lessor of Leased Equipment -Automatic Status When Required in Lease Agreement With You -Any person or organization from whom you lease equipment when you and such person or organization have agreed in writing in a contract or agreement that such person or organization is to be added as an additional insured on your policy. Such person or 
Page 7 of 12 Includes copyrighted material of Insurance Services Office, Inc., with its permission. © 201s1 Philadelphia Indemnity Insurance Company 
organization is an insured only with respect to liability for "bodily injury," "property damage" or "personal and advertising injury" caused, in whole or in part, by your maintenance, operation or use of equipment leased to you by such person or organization. 
A person's or organization's status as an additional insured under this endorsement ends when their contract or agreement with you for such leased equipment ends. 
With respect to the insurance afforded to these additional insureds, this insurance does not apply to any "occurrence" which takes place after the equipment lease expires. 
h. Granters of Permits -Any state or political subdivision granting you a permit in connection with your premises subject to the following additional provision: 
(1) This insurance applies only with respect to the followsng hazards for which the state or 
i

political subdivision has issued a permit in connection with the premises you own, rent or 
control and to which this insurance applies: 
(a) 
The existence, maintenance, repair, construction, erection, or removal of advertising signs, awnings, canopies, cellar entrances, coal holes, driveways, manholes, marquees, hoist away openings, sidewalk vaults, street banners or decorations and similar exposures; 

(b) 
The construction, erection, or removal of elevators; or 

(c) 
The ownership, maintenance, or use of any elevators covered by this insurance. 


i. Vendors -Only with respect to "bodily injury" or "property damage" arising out of "your products" which are distributed or sold in the regular course of the vendor's business, subject to the following additional exclusions: 
(1) The insurance afforded the vendor does not apply to: 
(a) 
"Bodily injury" or "property damage" for which the vendor is obligated to pay damages by reason of the assumption of liability in a contract or agreement. This exclusion does not apply to liability for damages that the vendor would have in the absence of the contract or agreement; 

(b) 
Any express warranty unauthorized by you; 

(c) 
Any physical or chemical change in the product made intentionally by the vendor; 

(d) 
Repackaging, except when unpacked solely for the purpose of inspection, 


demonstration, testing, or the substitution of parts under instructions from the 
manufacturer, and then repackaged in the original container; 
(e) 
Any failure to make such inspections, adjustments, tests or servicing as the vendor has agreed to make or normally undertakes to make in the usual course of business, in connection with the distribution or sale of the products; 

(f) 
Demonstration, installation, servicing or repair operations, except such operations performed at the vendor's premises in connection with the sale of the product; 


Page 8 of 12 
Includes copyrighted material of Insurance Services Office, Inc., with its permission. © 2011 Philadelphia Indemnity Insurance Company 
(g) 
Products which, after distribution or sale by you, have been labeled or relabeled or used as a container, part or ingredient of any other thing or substance by or for the vendor; or 

(h) 
"Bodily injury" or "property damage" arising out of the sole negligence of the vendor for its own acts or omissions or those of its employees or anyone else acting on its behalf. However, this exclusion does not apply to: 

(i) 
The exceptions contained in Sub-paragraphs (d) or (f); or 

(ii) 
Such inspections, adjustments, tests or servicing as the vendor has agreed to make or normally undertakes to make in the usual course of business, in connection with the distribution or sale of the products. 




(2) This insurance does not apply to any insured person or organization, from whom you have acquired such products, or any ingredient, part or container, entering into, accompanying or containing. 
j. 
Franchisor -Any person or organization with respect to their liability as the grantor of a franchise to you. 

k. 
As Required by Contract -Any person or organization where required by a written contract executed prior to the occurrence of a loss. Such person or organization is an additional insured for "bodily injury," "property damage" or "personal and advertising injury" but only for liability arising out of the negligence of the named insured. The limits of insurance applicable to these additional insureds are the lesser of the policy limits or those limits specified in a contract or agreement. These limits are included within and not in addition to the limits of insurance shown in the Declarations 

I. 
Owners, Lessees or Contractors -Any person or organization, but only with respect to liability for "bodily injury," "property damage" or "personal and advertising injury" caused, in whole or in part, by: 

(1) 
Your acts or omissions; or 


(2) 
The acts or omissions of those acting on your behalf; 




in the performance of your ongoing operations for the additional insured when required by a contract. 
With respect to the insurance afforded to these additional insureds, the following additional exclusions apply: 
This insurance does not apply to "bodily injury" or "property damage" occurring after: 
(a) 
All work, including materials, parts or equipment furnished in connection with such work, on the project (other than service, maintenance or repairs) to be performed by or on behalf of the additional insured(s) at the location of the covered operations has been completed; or 

(b) 
That portion of "your work" out of which the injury or damage arises has been put to its intended use by any person or organization other than another contractor or subcontractor engaged in performing operations for a principal as a part of the same project. 


Page 9 of 12 Includes copyrighted material of Insurance Services Office, Inc., with its permission. © 2011 Philadelphia Indemnity Insurance Company 
m. State or Political Subdivisions -Any state or political subdivision as required, subject to the following provisions: 
(1) 
This insurance applies only with respect to operations performed by you or on your behalf for which the state or political subdivision has issued a permit, and is required by 

contract. 


(2) 
This insurance does not apply to: 


(a) 
"Bodily injury," "property damage" or "personal and advertising injury" arising out of operations performed for the state or municipality; or 

(b) 
"Bodily injury" or "property damage" included within the "products-completed operations hazard." 




M. Duties in the Event of Occurrence, Claim or Suit 
SECTION IV -COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY CONDITIONS, Paragraph 2. is amended as follows: 
a. is amended to include: 
This condition applies only when the "occurrence" or offense is known to: 
(1) 
You, if you are an individual; 

(2) 
A partner, if you are a partnership; or 


(3) 
An executive officer or insurance manager, if you are a corporation. 


b. is amended to include: 
This condition will not be considered breached unless the breach occurs after such claim or "suit" is known to: 
(1) 
You, if you are an individual; 

(2) 
A partner, if you are a partnership; or 


(3) 
An executive officer or insurance manager, if you are a corporation. 


N. Unintentional Failure To Disclose Hazards 
SECTION IV -COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY CONDITIONS, 6. Representations is amended to include the following: 
It is agreed that, based on our reliance on your representations as to existing hazards, if you should unintentionally fail to disclose all such hazards prior to the beginning of the policy period of this Coverage Part, we shall not deny coverage under this Coverage Part because of such failure. 
0. Transfer of Rights of Recovery Against Others To Us 
SECTION IV -COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY CONDITIONS, 8. Transfer of Rights of 
Page 10 of 12 
Includes copyrighted material of Insurance Services Office, Inc., with its permission. © 2011 Philadelphia Indemnity Insurance Company 
Recovery Against Others To Us is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following: 
If the insured has rights to recover all or part of any payment we have made under this Coverage Part, those rights are transferred to us. The insured must do nothing after loss to impair them. At our request, the insured will bring "suit" or transfer those rights to us and help us enforce them. 
Therefore, the insured can waive the insurer's rights of recovery prior to the occurrence of a 
loss, provided the waiver is made in a written contract. 
P. Liberalization 

SECTION IV -COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY CONDITIONS, is amended to include the 
following: 
If we revise this endorsement to provide more coverage without additional premium charge, we will automatically provide the additional coverage to all endorsement holders as of the day the revision is effective in your state. 
Q. Bodily Injury -Mental Anguish SECTION V -DEFINITIONS, Paragraph 3. Is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following "Bodily injury" means: 
a. 
Bodily injury, sickness or disease sustained by a person, and includes mental anguish resulting from any of these; and 

b. 
Except for mental anguish, includes death resulting from the foregoing (Item a. above) at any time. 


R. Personal and Advertising Injury -Abuse of Process, Discrimination 
If COVERAGE B PERSONAL AND ADVERTISING INJURY LIABILITY COVERAGE is not 
otherwise excluded from this Coverage Part, the definition of "personal and advertising injury" is 
amended as follows: 
1. SECTION V-DEFINITIONS, Paragraph 14.b. is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following: 
b. Malicious prosecution or abuse of process; 

2. SECTION V -DEFINITIONS, Paragraph 14. is amended by adding the following: 
Discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, age or national origin, except when: 
a. 
Done intentionally by or at the direction of, or with the knowledge or consent of: 

(1) 
Any insured; or 


(2) 
Any executive officer, director, stockholder, partner or member of the insured; 



b. 
Directly or indirectly related to the employment, former or prospective employment, termination of employment, or application for employment of any person or persons by an insured; 


Page 11 of 12 
Includes copyrighted matersal of Insurance Services Office, Inc., with its permission. 
i

© 201s1 Philadelphia Indemnity Insurance Company 
c. 
Directly or indirectly related to the sale, rental, lease or sublease or prospective sales, rental, lease or sub-lease of any room, dwelling or premises by or at the direction of any insured; or 

d. 
Insurance for such discrimination is prohibited by or held in violation of law, public policy, legislation, court decision or administrative ruling. 


The above does not apply to fines or penalties imposed because of discrimination. 
Page 12 of 12 Includes copyrighted material of Insurance Services Office, Inc., with its permission. © 201s1 Philadelphia Indemnity Insurance Company 
THIS ENDORSEMENT CHANGES THE POLICY. PLEASE READ IT CAREFULLY. 



COMMERCIAL AUTOMOBILE ELITE ENDORSEMENT 
This endorsement modifies insurance provided under the following: 
BUSINESS AUTO COVERAGE PART 
Following is a summary of the Limits of Insurance and additional coverages provided by this endorsement. For complete details on specific coverages, consult the policy contract wording. 
Page

Coveraae Applicable Limit of Insurance 
# 
2

Who is An Insured 
Board Members Included 
Newly Acquired Entities Included 
IncludedDesignated Insured 
Included Cost of Bail Bonds $5,000 Lessor of Leased Autos 
2 

Reasonable Expenses -Loss of Earninqs $500 per day 
2 Fellow Employee Coverage 
3

Amended 
Towing $100 per disablement 
3 Glass Breakage (Windshields and Windows} 
3

No deductible applies 
Transportation Expenses $100 per day/ $3,000 maximum 
3 

Hired Auto Physical Damage -Loss of Use $100 per day/ $1,000 maximum 
3 

Hired Auto Physical Damage 
4

ACV or repair or replacement of the 
vehicle whichever is less 
Personal Effects 
4

$500 
Rental Reimbursement $100 per day/ 30 days 
4 

Accidental Discharqe -Air Bag Amended 
4 
5Electronic Equipment $1000 5Original Equipment Manufacturer Parts Included 

ReplacementAuto Loan I Lease Gap Coverage Amended 
5 

One Comprehensive Coverage Deductible Per 
6 Occurrence 
Amended 
Notice of and Knowledqe of Occurrence Amended 
7 

Amended (as required by written contract} Blanket Waiver of Subrogation 
7 

AmendedUnintentional Errors or Omissions 
7 


Mental Anguish -Bodily lniurv Redefined Amended 
7 

Coverage extensions under this endorsement only apply in the event that no other specific coverage for these extensions is provided under this policy. If such specific coverage applies, the terms, conditions and limits of that coverage are the sole and exclusive coverage applicable under this policy, unless otherwise noted in this endorsement. 
Any deductible listed in the Auto Declarations Page will apply unless specific deductible provisions are set forth under a coverage enhancement below. 
Page 1 of 7 

© 2015 Philadelphia Indemnity Insurance Company 
Includes copyrighted material of Insurance Services Office, Inc., with its permission. 
I. LIABILITY COVERAGE EXTENSIONS 
A. Who Is An Insured 
SECTION II -LIABILITY COVERAGE, A. Coverage, 1. Who Is An Insured is amended by adding the following: 
The following are also "insureds": 

1. 
Board Members -Board members (or their spouses) while renting a vehicle while on business for the named insured. 

2. 
Newly Acquired Entities -Any business entity newly acquired or formed by you during the policy period, provided you own 50% or more of the business entity and the business entity is not separately insured for Business Auto Coverage. Coverage is extended up to a maximum of 180 days following the acquisition or the formation of the business entity. 

3. 
Designated Insured -Any person or organization designated by the "insured" is an "insured" for Liability Coverage, but only to the extent that person or organization qualifies as an "insured" under the Who Is An Insured Provision contained in SECTION II of the Coverage Form. 

4. 
Lessor of Leased Autos -The lessor of a "leased auto" is an "insured" only for "bodily injury" or "property damage" resulting from the acts or omissions by: 


a. You; 
Any of your "employees" or agents; or 

c. Any person, except the lessor or any "employee" or agent of the lessor, operating 
a "leased auto" with the permission of any of the above. 
Any "leased auto" in the policy schedule will be considered a covered "auto" you own 
and not a covered "auto" you hire or borrow. 

The coverages provided under this endorsement apply to any "leased auto" in the policy schedule until the expiration date of the lease, or when the lessor or his or her agent takes possession of the "leased auto," whichever occurs first. 
"Leased auto" means an "auto" leased or rented to you, including any substitute, replacement or extra "auto" needed to meet seasonal or other needs, under a leasing or rental agreement that requires you to provide direct primary insurance for the lessor. 
B. Cost of Bail Bonds 
SECTION II -LIABILITY COVERAGE, A. Coverage, 2. Coverage Extensions, a. Supplementary Payments, Item (2) is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
(2) Up to $5,000 for cost of bail bonds (including bonds for related traffic law violations) required because of an "accident" we cover. We do not have to furnish these bonds. 
C. Reasonable Expenses 
SECTION II -LIABILITY COVERAGE, A. Coverage, 2. Coverage Extensions, a. Supplementary Payments, Item (4) is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
Page 2 of 7 
© 2015 Philadelphia Indemnity Insurance Company 
Includes copyrighted material of Insurance Services Office, Inc., with its permission 
(4) All reasonable expenses incurred by the "insured" at our request, including actual loss of earnings up to $500 a day because of time off from work. 
D. Fellow Employee Coverage 
SECTION II -LIABILITY COVERAGE, B. Exclusions, 5. Fellow Employee is deseted in its 
l
entirety and replaced by the following: 

"Bodily injury" to any fellow "employee" of the "insured" arising out of and in the course of the fellow "employee's" employment or while performing duties related to the conduct of your business. 
However, this exclusion does not apply to any manager or officer of your company. 
II. PHYSICAL DAMAGE COVERAGE EXTENSIONS 
A. Towing 
SECTION Ill -PHYSICAL DAMAGE COVERAGE, A. Coverage, 2. Towing is deleted in its 
entirety and replaced with the following: 
2. Towing 

We will pay up to $100 for towing and labor costs incurred each time a covered "auto" is disabled. However, the labor must be performed at the place of disablement. No deductible applies to this enhancement. 
B. Glass Breakage 
SECTION Ill -PHYSICAL DAMAGE COVERAGE, A. Coverage, 3. Glass Breakage -HittingA Bird Or Animal -Falling Objects Or Missiles is amended by adding the following: 
No deductible applies to "loss" to glass used in the windshield or windows. 
C. Transportation Expenses 
SECTION Ill -PHYSICAL DAMAGE COVERAGE, A. Coverage, 4. Coverage Extensions, a. Transportation Expenses is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
a. Transportation Expenses 

We will pay up to $100 per day to a maximum of $3,000 for temporary transportation expenses incurred by you because of a "loss" to a covered "auto." We will pay for temporary transportation expenses incurred during the period beginning 48 hours after the "loss" and ending, regardless of the policy's expiration, when the covered "auto" is returned to use or we pay for its "loss." 
D. Hired Auto Physical Damage -Loss of Use 
The last sentence of SECTION Ill -PHYSICAL DAMAGE COVERAGE, A. Coverage, 4. Coverage Extensions, b. Loss of Use Expenses is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
However, the most we will pay for any expenses for loss of use is $100 per day, to a 
maximum of $1,000 

Page 3 of 7 
© 2015 Philadelphia Indemnity Insurance Company 
Includes copyrighted material of Insurance Services Office, Inc., with its permission. 
E. Hired Auto Physical Damage 
SECTION Ill -PHYSICAL DAMAGE COVERAGE, A. Coverage, 4. Coverage Extensions is 
amended by adding the following extension: 
Hired Auto Physical Damage 

Any "auto" you lease, hire, rent or borrow from someone other than your "employees" or partners, or members of their household is a covered "auto" for each of your physical damage coverages. 
The most we will pay for any "loss" in any one "accident" is the ACV or the cost for repair or 
replacement of the vehicle, whichever is less. 

For each covered "auto" our obligation to pay will be reduced by a deductible of $500 for 
Comprehensive Coverage and $1000 for Collision Coverage. 
F. Personal Effects Coverage 
SECTION Ill -PHYSICAL DAMAGE COVERAGE, A. Coverage, 4. Coverage Extensions is amended by adding the following extension: 
Personal Effects Coverage 

We will pay up to $500 for "loss" to personal effects, which are: 
1. 
Owned by an "insured"; and 

2. 
In or on your covered "auto." 



This coverage applies only in the event of the total theft of your covered "auto." No deductible applies to this coverage. 
G. Rental Reimbursement 
SECTION Ill -PHYSICAL DAMAGE COVERAGE, A. Coverage, 4. Coverage Extensions is amended by adding the following extension: 
Rental Reimbursement Coverage 

We will pay up to $100 per day, for up to 30 days, for rental reimbursement expenses incurred by you for the rental of an "auto" because of "loss" to a covered "auto." 
We will also pay up to $300 for reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by you to remove and replace your materials and equipment from the covered "auto." 
If "loss" results from the total theft of a covered "auto," we will pay under this coverage only that 
amount of your rental reimbursement expenses which is not already provided under Item Ill. C. 
Transportation Expenses of this endorsement. 

H. Accidental Discharge -Airbag Coverage 
SECTION Ill -PHYSICAL DAMAGE COVERAGE, B. Exclusions, Paragraph 3. is amended by adding the following exception: 
Page 4 of 7 

© 2015 Philadelphia Indemnity Insurance Company Includes copyrighted material of Insurance Services Office, Inc., with its permission. 
This exclusion does not apply to the accidental discharge of an airbag. This coverage is excess of any other collectible insurance or warranty. No deductible applies to this coverage. 
I. Electronic Equipment Coverage 
The following supersedes anything to the contrary in SECTION Ill -PHYSICAL DAMAGE 
COVERAGE, B. Exclusions, Paragraph 4. 
ExclLJsions 4.c. c1nd 4.d. do not apply to: 

Any risk management or monitoring equipment and electronic equipment that receives or transmits audio, visual or data signals and that is not designed solely for the reproduction of sound. This coverage applies only if the equipment is permanently installed in the covered "auto" at the time of the "loss" or the equipment is removable from a housing unit which is permanently installed in the covered "auto" at the time of the "loss," and such equipment s
i

designed to be solely operated by use of the power from the "auto's" electrical system, in or 
upon the covered "auto." 

The most we will pay for all "loss" to risk management or monitoring equipment, audio, visual or data electronic equipment that is not designed solely for the reproduction of sound and any accessories used with this equipment as a result of any one "accident" is the least of: 
a. 
The actual cash value of the damaged or stolen property at the time of the "loss"; 

b. 
The cost of repairing or replacing the damaged or stolen property with other property of 


like kind and quality; or 
c. $1,000. 

This coverage will not apply if there is other insurance provided by this policy for the above­described electronic equipment. We will, however, pay any deductible, up to $500, that is applicable under the provisions of the other insurance. 
J. Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) Parts Replacement 
SECTION Ill -PHYSICAL DAMAGE COVERAGE, C. Limit of Insurance, Paragraph 1. is 
amended to include: 

However, if the covered "auto" has less than 20,000 miles on its odometer, then the following condition will apply: 
We will pay the cost to replace the damaged parts (excluding glass and mechanical parts) with new Original Equipment Manufacturer replacement parts if the damaged parts cannot be repaired. 
K. Auto Loan / Lease Gap Protection 
SECTION Ill -PHYSICAL DAMAGE COVERAGE, C. Limit of Insurance is amended to include the following: 
4. In the event of "loss" to a covered "auto" that is loaned or leased to an "insured": 
a. The most we will pay for "loss" in any one "accident" is the lesser of: 
Page 5 of 7 

© 2015 Philadelphia Indemnity Insurance Company Includes copyrighted material of Insurance Services Office, Inc., with its permission. 
(1) 
The actual cash value of the damaged or stolen property as of the time of the "loss"; or 

(2) 
The cost of repairing or replacing the damaged or stolen property with other property of like, kind and quality. 


b. Our Limit of Insurance for "total loss" will be the greater of: 
(1) 
The balance due under the terms of the lease or loan, to which your "auto" is subject but not including: 

(a) 
Past due payments; 


(b) 
Financial penalties imposed under the lease; 

(c) 
Security deposits not refunded; 


(d) 
Costs for extended warranties or insurance; or 

(e) 
Final payment due under a "balloon loan"; or 



(2) 
Actual cash value of the stolen or damaged property. 


An adjustment for depreciation and physical condition will be made in determining actual cash value at the time of "loss." 
c. Additional Definitions 

(1) 
'Total loss" for the purpose of this coverage, means a loss in which the estimated cost of repairs, plus the salvage value, exceeds the actual cash value. 

(2) 
"Balloon loan" is one with periodic payments that are insuff cient to repay the balance 


i

over the term of the loan, thereby requiring a large final payment. 
d. Additional Conditions 

This coverage will apply only to the original lease or loan written on your covered "auto." In order for this coverage to apply, leased "autos" must be leased or rented to you under a leasing or rental agreement, for a period of not less than six months, which requires you to provide direct primary insurance for the benefit of the lessor. 
L. One Comprehensive Coverage Deductible 
SECTION Ill -PHYSICAL DAMAGE COVERAGE, D. Deductible is amended by adding the following: 
Only one Comprehensive Coverage Deductible per occurrence will apply to any "loss" 
resulting from a covered peril. 

For the purpose of this extension, occurrence means a single incident, including continuous or repeated exposure to substantially the same general harmful conditions within a 24-hour period. 
Page 6 of 7 © 2015 Philadelphia Indemnity Insurance Company Includes copyrighted material of Insurance Services Office, Inc., with its permission. 
Ill. BUSINESS AUTO CONDITIONS 
A. Notice and Knowledge of Occurrence 
SECTION IV -BUSINESS AUTO CONDITIONS, A. Loss Conditions, 2. Duties In The Event Of Accident, Claim, Suit Or Loss, Paragraph a. is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
a. In the event of "accident," claim, "suit" or "loss," you must give us, or our authorized representative, prompt notice of the "accident" or "loss." Include: 
(1) 
How, when and where the "accident" or "loss" occurred; 

(2) 
The "insured's" name and address; and 

(3) 
To the extent possible, the names and addresses of any injured persons and 


witnesses. 

Your duty to give us or our authorized representative prompt notice of the "accident" or 
"loss" applies only when the "accident" or "loss" is known to: 
(1) 
You, if you are an individual; 

(2) 
A partner, if you are a partnership; or 


(3) 
An executive officer or insurance manager, if you are a corporation. 


B. Blanket Waiver Of Subrogation 
SECTION IV -BUSINESS AUTO CONDITIONS, A. Loss Conditions, 5. Transfer Of Rights Of Recovery Against Others To Us, is amended by adding the following exception: 
However, we waive any right of recovery we may have against any person or organization because of payments we make for "bodily injury" or "property damage" arising out of the operation of a covered "auto" when you have assumed liability for such "bodily injury" or "property damage" under an "insured contract." 
C. Unintentional Errors or Omissions 
SECTION IV -BUSINESS AUTO CONDITIONS, B. General Conditions, 2. Concealment, Misrepresentation, Or Fraud is amended by adding the following: 
The unintentional omission of, or unintentional error in, any information given by you shall not prejudice your rights under this insurance. However, this provision does not affect our right to collect additional premium or exercise our right of cancellation or non-renewal. 
IV. DEFINITIONS 
A. Mental Anguish 
SECTION V -DEFINITIONS, C. "Bodily injury" is amended by adding the following: 
"Bodily injury" also includes mental anguish but only when the mental anguish arises from 
other bodily injury, sickness, or disease. 

Page 7 of? 
© 2015 Philadelphia Indemnity Insurance Company 
Includes copyrighted material of Insurance Services Office, Inc., with its permission. 
THIS ENDORSEMENT CHANGES THE POLICY. PLEASE READ IT CAREFULLY. 
ADDITIONAL INSURED 


PRIMARY AND NON-CONTRIBUTORY INSURANCE 
This endorsement modifies insurance provided under the following: 
COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY COVERAGE PART 
SCHEDULE 
Effective Date: 09/01/2016 
Name of Person or Organization (Additional Insured): 
Blanket Where Required By Contract 
SECTION II -WHO IS AN INSURED is amended to include as an additional insured the person(s) or organization(s) shown in the endorsement Schedule, but only wsth respect to liability for "bodily injury," 
i

"property damage" or "personal and advertising injury" arising out of or relating to your negligence in the performance of "your work" for such person(s) or organszation(s) that occurs on or after the effective date
i

shown in the endorsement Schedule. 
This insurance is primary to and non-contributory with any other insurance maintained by the person or organization (Additional Insured), except for loss resulting from the sole negligence of that person or organization. 
This condition applies even if other valid and collectible insurance is available to the Additional Insured for a loss or "occurrence" we cover for this Additional Insured. 
The Additional lnsured's limits of insurance do not increase our limits of insurance, as described in SECTION Ill -LIMITS OF INSURANCE. 
All other terms, conditions, and exclusions under the policy are applicable to this endorsement and remain unchanged. 
Page 1 of 1 Includes copyrighted material of Insurance Services Office, Inc., with its permission. 
COMMERCIAL AUTO CA 00 01 0310 


BUSINESS AUTO COVERAGE FORM 
Various prov1s1ons in this policy restrict coverage.Read the entire policy carefully to determine rights, duties and what is and is not covered. 
Throughout this policy the words "you" and "your" re­fer to the Named Insured shown in the Declarations. The words "we", "us" and "our" refer to the company providing this insurance. 
Other words and phrases that appear in quotationmarks have special meaning. Refer to Section V ­Definitions. 
SECTION I -COVERED AUTOS 
Item Two of the Declarations shows the "autos" that are covered "autos" for each of your coverages. The following numerical symbols describe the "autos" that may be covered "autos". The symbols entered next to a coverage on the Declarations designate the only"autos" that are covered "autos". 
A. Description Of Covered Auto Designation Symbols 
Symbol  Description Of Covered Auto Designation Symbols  
1  Any "Auto"  
2  Owned "Autos" Only  Only those "autos" you own (and for Liability Coverage any "trailers" you don't own while attached to power units you own). This includes those "autos" you acquire ownership of after the policy begins.  
3  Owned Private Passenger"Autos" Only  Only the private passenger "autos" you own. This includes those private passenger "autos" you acquire ownership of after the policy begins.  
4  Owned "Autos" Other Than Private Passenger"Autos" Only  Only those "autos" you own that are not of the private passenger type (and for Liability Coverage any "trailers" you don't own while attached to power units you own). This includes those "autos" not of the private passenger type you acquire ownership of after the policy begins.  
5  Owned "Autos" Subject To No-fault  Only those "autos" you own that are required to have no-fault benefits in the state where they are licensed or principally garaged. This includes those "autos" you acquire ownership of after the policy begins provided they are required to have no-fault benefits in the state where they are licensed or principally garaged  
6  Owned "Autos" Subject To A CompulsoryUninsured Motorists Law  Only those "autos" you own that because of the law in the state where they are licensed or principally garaged are required to have and cannot reject Uninsured Motorists Coverage. This includes those "autos" you acquire ownership of after the policy begins provided they are subject to the same state uninsured motorists requirement.  
7  SpecificallyDescribed "Autos"  Only those "autos" described in Item Three of the Declarations for which a premium charge is shown (and for Liability Coverage any "trailers" you don't own while attached to any power unit described in Item Three).  
8  Hired "Autos" Only  Only those "autos" you lease, hire, rent or borrow. This does not include any "auto" you lease, hire, rent or borrow from any of your "employees", partners (if you are a partnership), members (if you are a limited liability company) or members of their households.  
9  Non-owned "Autos" Only  Only those "autos" you do not own, lease, hire, rent or borrow that are used in connection with your business. This includes "autos" owned by your "employees", partners (if you are a partnership), members (if you are a limited liability company) or members of their households but only while used in your business or your personal affairs.  

CA 00 01 0310 © Insurance Services Office, Inc., 2009 Page 1 of 12 . 
19  Mobile Equip­ment Subject To Compulsory Or Financial ResponsibilityOr Other Motor  Only those "autos" that are land vehicles and that would qualify under the definition of "mobile equipment" under this policy if they were not subject to a compulsory or financial responsibility law or other motor vehicle insurance law where they are licensed or principally garaged.  
Vehicle Insur­ 
ance Law Only  

B. Owned Autos You Acquire After The Policy Begins 
1. 
If Symbols 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 or 19 are entered next to a coverage in Item Two of the Declara­tions, then you have coverage for "autos" that you acquire of the type described for the re­mainder of the policy period. 

2. 
But, if Symbol 7 is entered next to a coveragein Item Two of the Declarations, an "auto" you acquire will be a covered "auto" for that cover­age only if 

a. 
We already cover all "autos" that you own for that coverage or it replaces an "auto" you previously owned that had that cover­age; and 

b. 
You tell us within 30 days after you acquire it that you want us to cover it for that cover­age. 




C. Certain Trailers, Mobile Equipment And Temporary Substitute Autos 
If Liability Coverage is provided by this coverage 
form, the following types of vehicles are also cov­
ered "autos" for Liability Coverage: 
1. 
"Trailers" with a load capacity of 2,000 pounds or less designed primarily for travel on publicroads. 

2. 
"Mobile equipment" while being carried or towed by a covered "auto". 

3. 
Any "auto" you do not own while used with the permission of its owner as a temporary substi­tute for a covered "auto" you own that is out of service because of its: 

a. 
Breakdown; 

b. 
Repair; 

C. 
Servicing; 

d. 
"Loss"; or 

e. 
Destruction. 




SECTION II -LIABILITY COVERAGE 
A. Coverage 
We will pay all sums an "insured" legally must pay as damages because of "bodily injury" or "property damage" to which this insurance applies, caused by an "accident" and resulting from the ownership, maintenance or use of a covered "auto". 
We will also pay all sums an "insured" legally must pay as a "covered pollution cost or expense" to which this insurance applies, caused by an "acci­dent" and resulting from the ownership, mainte­nance or use of covered "autos". However, we will only pay for the "covered pollution cost or ex­pense" if there is either "bodily injury" or "property damage" to which this insurance applies that is caused by the same "accident". 
We have the right and duty to defend any "in­sured" against a "suit" asking for such damages or a "covered pollution cost or expense". However, we have no duty to defend any "insured" against a "suit" seeking damages for "bodily injury" or "prop­erty damage" or a "covered pollution cost or ex­pense" to which this insurance does not apply. We may investigate and settle any claim or "suit" as we consider appropriate. Our duty to defend or settle ends when the Liability Coverage Limit of Insurance has been exhausted by payment of judgments or settlements. 
1. Who Is An Insured 
The following are "insureds": 
a. 
You for any covered "auto". 

b. 
Anyone else while using with your permis­sion a covered "auto" you own, hire or bor­row except: 


(1) The owner or anyone else from whom 
you hire or borrow a covered "auto". 
This exception does not apply if the covered "auto" is a "trailer" connected to a covered "auto" you own. 

Page 2 of 12 © Insurance Services Office, Inc , 2009 CA 00 01 03s10 . 
(2) 
Your "employee" if the covered "auto" is owned by that "employee" or a member of his or her household. 

(3) 
Someone using a covered "auto" while he or she is working in a business of selling, servicing, repairing, parking or storing "autos" unless that business is yours. 

(4) 
Anyone other than your "employees",partners (if you are a partnership), members (if you are a limited liabilitycompany) or a lessee or borrower or any of their "employees", while moving property to or from a covered "auto". 

(5) 
A partner (if you are a partnership) or a member (if you are a limited liabilitycompany) for a covered "auto" owned by him or her or a member of his or her household. 

c. 
Anyone liable for the conduct of an "in­sured" described above but only to the ex­tent of that liability. 


2. Coverage Extensions 
a. Supplementary Payments 
We will pay for the "insured": 
(1) 
All expenses we incur. 

(2) 
Up to $2,000 for cost of bail bonds (in­cluding bonds for related traffic law vio­lations) required because of an "acci­dent" we cover. We do not have to fur­nish these bonds. 

(3) 
The cost of bonds to release attach­ments in any "suit" against the "insured" we defend, but only for bond amounts within our Limit of Insurance. 

(4) 
All reasonable expenses incurred by the "insured" at our request, including actual loss of earnings up to $250 a day be­cause of time off from work. 

(5) 
All court costs taxed against the "in­sured" in any "suit" against the "insured" we defend. However, these paymentsdo not include attorneys' fees or attor­neys' expenses taxed against the "in­sured". 

(6) 
All interest on the full amount of any judgment that accrues after entry of the judgment in any "suit" against the "in­sured" we defend, but our duty to pay in­terest ends when we have paid, offered to pay or deposited in court the part of the judgment that is within our Limit of Insurance. 


These payments will not reduce the Limit of Insurance. 
b. Out-of-state Coverage Extensions 
While a covered "auto" is away from the state where it is licensed we will: 
(1) 
Increase the Limit of Insurance for Li­ability Coverage to meet the limits speci­fied by a compulsory or financial re­sponsibility law of the jurisdiction where the covered "auto" is being used. This extension does not apply to the limit or limits specified by any law governingmotor carriers of passengers or prop­erty. 

(2) 
Provide the minimum amounts and types of other coverages, such as no­fault, required of out-of-state vehicles by thejurisdiction where the covered "auto" is being used. 


We will not pay anyone more than once for the same elements of loss because of these extensions. 

B. Exclusions 
This insurance does not apply to any of the follow­ing: 
1. Expected Or Intended Injury 
"Bodily injury" or "property damage" expected or intended from the standpoint of the "in­sured". 

2. Contractual 
Liability assumed under any contract or agreement. 
But this exclusion does not apply to liability for damages: 
a. 
Assumed in a contract or agreement that is an "insured contract" provided the "bodilyinjury" or "property damage" occurs subse­quent to the execution of the contract or agreement; or 

b. 
That the "insured" would have in the ab­sence of the contract or agreement. 



3. Workers' Compensation 
Any obligation for which the "insured" or the "insured's" insurer may be held liable under any workers' compensation, disability benefits or unemployment compensation law or anysimilar law. 

CA 00 01 0310 © Insurance Services Office, Inc., 2009 Page 3 of 12 . 
4. Employee Indemnification And Employer's 
Liability 
"Bodily injury" to: 
a. An "employee" of the "insured" arising out of and in the course of: 
(1) 
Employment by the "insured"; or 

(2) 
Performing the duties related to the conduct of the "insured's" business; or 

b. 
The spouse, child, parent, brother or sister of that "employee" as a consequence of Pa­ragraph a. above. 


This exclusion applies: 
(1) 
Whether the "insured" may be liable as an employer or in any other capacity; and 

(2) 
To any obligation to share damages with or repay someone else who must paydamages because of the injury. 


But this exclusion does not apply to "bodily in­jury" to domestic "employees" not entitled to workers' compensation benefits or to liabilityassumed by the "insured" under an "insured contract". For the purposes of the coverageform, a domestic "employee" is a person en­gaged in household or domestic work per­formed principally in connection with a resi­dence premises. 
5. Fellow Employee 
"Bodily injury" to: 
a. 
Any fellow "employee" of the "insured" aris­ing out of and in the course of the fellow "employee's" employment or while perform­ing duties related to the conduct of yourbusiness; or 

b. 
The spouse, child, parent, brother or sister of that fellow "employee" as a consequence of Paragraph a. above. 


6. Care, Custody Or Control 
"Property damage" to or "covered pollution cost or expense" involving property owned or trans­ported by the "insured" or in the "insured's" care, custody or control. But this exclusion does not apply to liability assumed under a si­detrack agreement. 
7. Handling Of Property 
"Bodily injury" or "property damage" resultingfrom the handling of property: 
a. Before it is moved from the place where it is accepted by the "insured" for movement in­to or onto the covered "auto"; or 
b. After it is moved from the covered "auto" to the place where it is finally delivered by the "insured". 

8. Movement Of Property By Mechanical Device 
"Bodily injury" or "property damage" resulting from the movement of property by a mechani­cal device (other than a hand truck) unless the device is attached to the covered "auto". 

9. Operations 
"Bodily injury" or "property damage" arising out of the operation of: 
a. 
Any equipment listed in Paragraphs 6.b. and 6.c. of the definition of "mobile equip­ment"; or 

b. 
Machinery or equipment that is on, attached to or part of a land vehicle that would qual­ify under the definition of "mobile equip­ment" if it were not subject to a compulsoryor financial responsibility law or other motor vehicle insurance law where it is licensed or principally garaged. 



10. Completed Operations 
"Bodily injury" or "property damage" arising out of your work after that work has been com­pleted or abandoned. 
In this exclusion, your work means: 
a. 
Work or operations performed by you or on your behalf; and 

b. 
Materials, parts or equipment furnished in 


connection with such work or operations. 
Your work includes warranties or representa­tions made at any time with respect to the fit­ness, quality, durability or performance of any of the items included in Paragraph a. or b. above. 
Your work will be deemed completed at the earliest of the following times: 
(1) 
When all of the work called for in your contract has been completed. 

(2) 
When all of the work to be done at the site has been completed if your contract calls for work at more than one site. 

(3) 
When that part of the work done at a job site has been put to its intended use by any person or organization other than another contractor or subcontractor working on the same project. 



Page 4 of 12 © Insurance Services Office, Inc., 2009 CA00s01s03s10 D 
Work that may need service, maintenance, cor­rection, repair or replacement, but which is otherwise complete, will be treated as com­pleted. 
11. Pollution 
"Bodily injury" or "property damage" arising out of the actual, alleged or threatened discharge, dispersal, seepage, migration, release or es­cape of "pollutants": 
a. That are, or that are contained in any prop­erty that is: 
(1) 
Being transported or towed by, handled or handled for movement into, onto or from the covered "auto"; 

(2) 
Otherwise in the course of transit by or on behalf of the "insured"; or 

(3) 
Being stored, disposed of, treated or processed in or upon the covered "au­to"; 

b. 
Before the "pollutants" or any property in which the "pollutants" are contained are moved from the place where they are ac­cepted by the "insured" for movement into or onto the covered "auto"; or 

c. 
After the "pollutants" or any property in which the "pollutants" are contained are moved from the covered "auto" to the place where they are fsnally delivered, disposed of 


i

or abandoned by the "insured". 
Paragraph a. above does not apply to fuels, lu­bricants, fluids, exhaust gases or other similar "pollutants" that are needed for or result from the normal electrical, hydraulic or mechanical functioning of the covered "auto" or its parts, if: 
(1) 
The "pollutants" escape, seep, migrateor are discharged, dispersed or released directly from an "auto" part designed by its manufacturer to hold, store, receive or dispose of such "pollutants"; and 

(2) 
The "bodily injury", "property damage" or "covered pollution cost or expense"does not arise out of the operation of any equipment listed in Paragraphs 6.b. and 6.c. of the definition of "mobile equipment". 


Paragraphs b. and c. above of this exclusion do not apply to "accidents" that occur awayfrom premises owned by or rented to an "in­sured" with respect to "pollutants" not in or upon a covered "auto" if: 
(a) 
The "pollutants" or any property in which the "pollutants" are contained are upset,overturned or damaged as a result of the maintenance or use of a covered "auto"; and 

(b) 
The discharge, dispersal, seepage, mi­gration, release or escape of the "pollut­ants" is caused directly by such upset, overturn or damage. 



12. War 
"Bodily injury" or "property damage" arising di­rectly or indirectly out of: 
a. 
War, including undeclared or civil war; 

b. 
Warlike action by a military force, including action in hindering or defending against an actual or expected attack, by any govern­ment, sovereign or other authority using military personnel or other agents; or 

c. 
Insurrection, rebellion, revolution, usurped power or action taken by governmental au­thority in hindering or defending against any of these. 



13. Racing 
Covered "autos" while used in any professional or organized racing or demolition contest or stunting activity, or while practicing for such contest or activity. This insurance also does not apply while that covered "auto" is beingprepared for such a contest or activity. 

C. Limit Of Insurance 
Regardless of the number of covered "autos", "in­sureds", premiums paid, claims made or vehicles involved in the "accident", the most we will pay for the total of all damages and "covered pollutioncost or expense" combined resulting from any one "accident" is the Limit of Insurance for Liability Coverage shown in the Declarations. 
CA 00 01 0310 © Insurance Services Office, Inc., 2009 Page 5 of 12 . 
All "bodily injury", "property damage" and "covered pollution cost or expense" resulting from continu­ous or repeated exposure to substantially the same conditions will be considered as resultingfrom one "accident". 
No one will be entitled to receive duplicate pay­ments for the same elements of "loss" under this coverage form and any Medical Payments Cover­age endorsement, Uninsured Motorssts Coverage
i

endorsement or Underinsured Motorists Coverage endorsement attached to this Coverage Part. 
SECTION Ill -PHYSICAL DAMAGE COVERAGE 
A. Coverage 
1. We will pay for "loss" to a covered "auto" or its equipment under: 
a. Comprehensive Coverage 
From any cause except: 
(1) 
The covered "auto's" collision with an­other object; or 

(2) 
The covered "auto's" overturn. 


b. Specified Causes Of Loss Coverage 
Caused by: 
(1) 
Fire, lightning or explosion; 

(2) 
Theft; 

(3) 
Windstorm, hail or earthquake; 

(4) 
Flood; 

(5) 
Mischief or vandalism; or 

(6) 
The sinking, burning, collision or derail­ment of any conveyance transportingthe covered "auto". 


c. Collision Coverage 
Caused by: 
(1) 
The covered "auto's" collision with an­other object; or 

(2) 
The covered "auto's" overturn. 


2. Towing 
We will pay up to the limit shown in the Decla­rations for towing and labor costs incurred each time a covered "auto" of the private pas­senger type is disabled. However, the labor must be performed at the place of disablement. 
3. Glass Breakage -Hitting A Bird Or Animal ­Falling Objects Or Missiles 
If you carry Comprehensive Coverage for the damaged covered "auto", we will pay for the following under Comprehensive Coverage: 
a. 
Glass breakage; 

b. 
"Loss" caused by hilting a bird or animal;and 


c. "Loss" caused by falling objects or missiles. 
However, you have the option of having glass breakage caused by a covered "auto's" colli­sion or overturn considered a "loss" under Col­lision Coverage. 

4. Coverage Extensions 
a. Transportation Expenses 
We will pay up to $20 per day to a maxi­mum of $600 for temporary transportation expense incurred by you because of the to­tal theft of a covered "auto" of the private passenger type. We will pay only for those covered "autos" for which you carry either Comprehensive or Specified Causes Of Loss Coverage. We will pay for temporary transportation expenses incurred during the period beginning 48 hours after the theft and ending, regardless of the policy's expi­ration, when the covered "auto" is returned to use or we pay for its "loss". 
b. Loss Of Use Expenses 
For Hired Auto Physical Damage, we will pay expenses for which an "insured" be­comes legally responsible to pay for loss of use of a vehicle rented or hired without a driver under a written rental contract or agreement. We will pay for loss of use ex­penses if caused by: 
(1) 
Other than collision only if the Declara­tions indicate that Comprehensive Cov­erage is provided for any covered "au­to"; 

(2) 
Specified Causes Of Loss only if the Declarations indicate that SpecifiedCauses Of Loss Coverage is providedfor any covered "auto"; or 

(3) 
Collision only if the Declarations indicate that Collision Coverage is provided for any covered "auto". 


However, the most we will pay for any ex­
penses for loss of use is $20 per day, to a 
maximum of $600. 

B. Exclusions 
1. We will not pay for "loss" caused by or resulting from any of the following. Such "loss" is ex­cluded regardless of any other cause or event that contributes concurrently or in any se­quence to the "loss". 
a. Nuclear Hazard 
(1) 
The explosion of any weapon employing atomic fission or fusion; or 

(2) 
Nuclear reaction or radiation, or radioac­tive contamination, however caused. 



Page 6 of 12 © Insurance Services Office, Inc., 2009 CA 00 01s0310 . 
b. War Or Military Action 
(1) 
War, including undeclared or civil war; 

(2) 
Warlike action by a military force, includ­ing action in hindering or defending against an actual or expected attack, by any government, sovereign or other au­thority using military personnel or other agents; or 

(3) 
Insurrection, rebellion, revolution, usurped power or action taken by gov­ernmental authority in hindering or de­fending against any of these. 


2. We wsll not pay for "loss" to any covered "auto" 
i

while used in any professional or organizedracing or demolition contest or stunting activity, or while practicing for such contest or activity.We will also not pay for "loss" to any covered "auto" while that covered "auto" is being pre­pared for such a contest or activity. 
3. We will not pay for "loss" due and confined to: 
a. 
Wear and tear, freezing, mechanical or electrical breakdown. 

b. 
Blowouts, punctures or other road damage 


to tires. 
This exclusion does not apply to such "loss" resulting from the total theft of a covered "au­to". 
4. We will not pay for "loss" to any of the follow­ing: 
a. 
Tapes, records, discs or other similar audio, visual or data electronic devices designed for use with audio, visual or data electronic equipment. 

b. 
Any device designed or used to detect speed-measuring equipment such as radar or laser detectors and any jamming appara­tus intended to elude or disrupt speed­measurement equipment. 

c. 
Any electronic equipment, without regard to whether this equipment is permanently in­stalled, that reproduces, receives or trans­mits audio, visual or data signals. 

d. 
Any accessories used with the electronic equipment described in Paragraph c. above. 


5. Exclusions 4.c. and 4.d. do not apply to equipment designed to be operated solely by use of the power from the "auto's" electrscal
i

system that, at the time of "loss", is: 
a. Permanently installed in or upon the cov­ered "auto"; 
b. 
Removable from a housing unit which is permanently installed in or upon the cov­ered "auto"; 

c. 
An integral part of the same unit housing any electronic equipment described in Pa­ragraphs a. and b. above; or 

d. 
Necessary for the normal operation of the covered "auto" or the monitoring of the covered "auto's" operating system. 



6. We will not pay for "loss" to a covered "auto" due to "diminution in value". 
C. Limit Of Insurance 
1. The most we will pay for "loss" in any one "ac­cident" is the lesser of: 
a. 
The actual cash value of the damaged or stolen property as of the time of the "loss"; or 

b. 
The cost of repairing or replacing the dam­aged or stolen property with other property of like kind and quality. 



2. $1,000 is the most we will pay for "loss" in any one "accident" to all electronic equipment that reproduces, receives or transmits audio, visual or data signals which, at the time of "loss", is: 
a. 
Permanently installed in or upon the cov­ered "auto" in a housing, opening or other location that is not normally used by the "auto" manufacturer for the installation of such equipment; 

b. 
Removable from a permanently installed housing unit as described in Paragraph 2.a. above or is an integral part of that equip­ment; or 

c. 
An integral part of such equipment. 



3. 
An adjustment for depreciation and physicalcondition will be made in determining actual cash value in the event of a total "loss". 

4. 
If a repair or replacement results in better than like kind or quality, we will not pay for the amount of the betterment. 


D. Deductible 
For each covered "auto", our obligation to pay for, repair, return or replace damaged or stolen prop­erty will be reduced by the applicable deductible shown in the Declarations. Any Comprehensive Coverage deductible shown in the Declarations does not apply to "loss" caused by fire or lightning. 
CA 00 01 03 10 © Insurance Services Offisce, Inc., 2009 Page 7 of 12 . 
SECTION IV -BUSINESS AUTO CONDITIONS 
The following conditions apply in addition to the Common Policy Conditions: 
A. Loss Conditions 
1. Appraisal For Physical Damage Loss 
If you and we disagree on the amount of "loss" either may demand an appraisal of the "loss": 
In this event, each party will select a competent appraiser. The two appraisers will select a competent and impartial umpire. The apprais­ers will state separately the actual cash value and amount of "loss". If they fail to agree, they will submit their differences to the umpire. A decision agreed to by any two will be binding. Each party will: 
a. 
Pay its chosen appraiser; and 

b. 
Bear the other expenses of the appraisal and umpire equally. 


If we submit to an appraisal, we will still retain our rsght to deny the claim. 
is
2. Duties In The Event Of Accident, Claim, Suit Or Loss 
We have no duty to provide coverage under this policy unless there has been full compli­ance with the following duties: 
a. In the event of "accident", claim, "suit" or "loss", you must give us or our authorized representative prompt notice of the "acci­dent" or "loss". Include: 
(1) 
How, when and where the "accident" or "loss" occurred; 

(2) 
The "insured's" name and address; and 

(3) 
To the extent possible, the names and addresses of any injured persons and witnesses. 

b. 
Additionally, you and any other involved "insured" must: 

(1) 
Assume no obligation, make no pay­ment or incur no expense without our consent, except at the "insured's" own cost. 

(2) 
Immediately send us copies of any re­quest, demand, order, notice, summons or legal paper received concerning the claim or "suit". 

(3) 
Cooperate with us in the investigation or settlement of the claim or defense against the "suit". 

(4) 
Authorize us to obtain medical records or other pertinent information. 


(5) Submit to examination, at our expense,by physicians of our choice, as often as we reasonably require. 
c. If there is "loss" to a covered "auto" or its equipment you must also do the following: 
(1) 
Promptly notify the police if the covered "auto" or any of its equipment is stolen. 

(2) 
Take all reasonable steps to protect the covered "auto" from further damage. Al­so keep a record of your expenses for consideration in the settlement of the claim. 

(3) 
Permit us to inspect the covered "auto" and records proving the "loss" before its repair or disposition. 

(4) 
Agree to examinations under oath at our request and give us a signed statement of your answers. 



3. Legal Action Against Us 
No one may bring a legal action against us un­der this coverage form until: 
a. 
There has been full compliance with all the terms of this coverage form; and 

b. 
Under Liability Coverage, we agree in writ­ing that the "insured" has an obligation to pay or until the amount of that obligation has finally been determined by judgment af­ter trial. No one has the right under this pol­icy to bring us into an action to determine the "insured's" liability. 



4. Loss Payment -Physical Damage Coverages 
At our option we may: 
a. 
Pay for, repair or replace damaged or sto­len property; 

b. 
Return the stolen property, at our expense. 


We will pay for any damage that results to the "auto" from the theft; or 
c. Take all or any part of the damaged or sto­len property at an agreed or appraised val­ue. 
If we pay for the "loss", our payment will in­clude the applicable sales tax for the damaged or stolen property. 

5. Transfer Of Rights Of Recovery Against Others To Us 
If any person or organization to or for whom we make payment under this coverage form has rights to recover damages from another, those rights are transferred to us. That person or or­ganization must do everything necessary to secure our rights and must do nothing after "accident" or "loss" to impair them. 

Page 8 of 12 © Insurance Services Office, Inc., 2009 CA00s01s03s10 . 
B. General Conditions 
1. Bankruptcy 
Bankruptcy or insolvency of the "insured" or the "insured's" estate will not relieve us of any obli­gations under this coverage form. 
2. Concealment, Misrepresentation Or Fraud 
This coverage form is void in any case of fraud by you at any time as it relates to this coverage form. It is also void if you or any other "in­sured", at any time, intentionally conceal or misrepresent a material fact concerning: 
a. 
This coverage form; 

b. 
The covered "auto"; 

c. 
Your interest in the covered "auto"; or 

d. 
A claim under this coverage form. 


3. Liberalization 
If we revise this coverage form to provide more coverage without additional premium charge, your policy will automatically provide the addi­tional coverage as of the day the revision is ef­fective in your state. 
4. No Benefit To Bailee -Physical Damage Coverages 
We will not recognize any assignment or grantany coverage for the benefit of any person or organization holding, storing or transportingproperty for a fee regardless of any other pro­vision of this coverage form. 
5. Other Insurance 
a. For any covered "auto" you own, this cov­erage form provides primary insurance. For any covered "auto" you don't own, the in­surance provided by this coverage form is excess over any other collectible insurance. However, while a covered "auto" which is a "trailer" is connected to another vehicle, the Liability Coverage this coverage form pro­vides for the "trailer" is: 
(1) 
Excess while it is connected to a motor vehicle you do not own. 

(2) 
Primary while it is connected to a cov­ered "auto" you own. 

b. 
For Hired Auto Physical Damage Coverage, any covered "auto" you lease, hire, rent or borrow is deemed to be a covered "auto" you own. However, any "auto" that is leased, hired, rented or borrowed with a driver is not a covered "auto". 

c. 
Regardless of the provisions of Paragraph 

a. 
above, this coverage form's LiabilityCoverage is primary for any liability as­sumed under an "insured contract". 


d. When this coverage form and any other coverage form or policy covers on the same basis, either excess or primary, we will pay only our share. Our share is the proportion that the Limit of Insurance of our coverageform bears to the total of the limits of all the coverage forms and policies covering on the same basis. 

6. Premium Audit 
a. 
The estimated premium for this coverageform is based on the exposures you told us you would have when this policy began. We will compute the final premium due when we determine your actual exposures. The estimated total premium will be credited against the final premium due and the first Named Insured will be billed for the bal­ance, if any. The due date for the final pre­mium or retrospective premium is the date shown as the due date on the bill. If the es­timated total premium exceeds the final premium due, the first Named Insured will get a refund. 

b. 
If this policy is issued for more than one year, the premium for this coverage form will be computed annually based on our rates or premiums in effect at the beginning of each year of the policy. 



7. Policy Period, Coverage Territory 
Under this coverage form, we cover "accidents" and "losses" occurring: 
a. During the policy period shown in the Dec­
larations; and 
b. Within the coverage territory. The coverage territory is: 
(1) 
The United States of America; 

(2) 
The territories and possessions of the Unit­ed States of America; 

(3) 
Puerto Rico; 

(4) 
Canada; and 

(5) 
Anywhere in the world if: 

(a) 
A covered "auto" of the private passen­ger type is leased, hired, rented or bor­rowed without a driver for a period of 30 days or less; and 

(b) 
The "insured's" responsibility to paydamages is determined in a "suit" on the merits, in the United States of America. the territories and possessions of the United States of America, Puerto Rico or Canada or in a settlement we agreeto. 





CA 00 01 0310 © Insurance Services Office, Inc., 2009 Page 9 of 12 . 
We also cover "loss" to, or "accidents" involv­ing, a covered "auto" while being transported between any of these places. 
8. Two Or More Coverage Forms Or Policies Issued By Us 
If this coverage form and any other coverage form or policy issued to you by us or any com­pany affiliated with us applies to the same "ac­cident", the aggregate maximum Limit of Insur­ance under all the coverage forms or policiesshall not exceed the highest applicable Limit of Insurance under any one coverage form or pol­icy. This condition does not apply to any cov­erage form or policy issued by us or an affili­ated company specifically to apply as excess insurance over this coverage form. 
SECTION V -DEFINITIONS 
A. "Accident" includes continuous or repeated expo­sure to the same conditions resulting in "bodily in­jury" or "property damage". 
B. "Auto" means: 
1. 
A land motor vehicle, "trailer" or semitrailer de­signed for travel on public roads; or 

2. 
Any other land vehicle that is subject to a com­pulsory or financial responsibility law or other motor vehicle insurance law where it is li­censed or principally garaged. 


However, "auto" does not include "mobile equip­ment". 
C. "Bodily injury" means bodily injury, sickness or disease sustained by a person including death re­sulting from any of these. 
D. "Covered pollution cost or expense" means anycost or expense arising out of: 
1. 
Any request, demand, order or statutory or regulatory requirement that any "insured" or others test for, monitor, clean up, remove, con­tain, treat, detoxify or neutralize, or in any way respond to, or assess the effects of, "pollut­ants"; or 

2. 
Any claim or "suit" by or on behalf of a gov­ernmental authority for damages because of testing for, monitoring, cleaning up, removing, containing, treating, detoxifying or neutralizing, or in any way responding to, or assessing the effects of, "pollutants". 


"Covered pollution cost or expense" does not in­clude any cost or expense arising out of the ac­tual, alleged or threatened discharge, dispersal, seepage, migration, release or escape of "pollut­ants": 
a. 
That are, or that are contained in any prop­erty that is: 

(1) 
Being transported or towed by, handled or handled for movement into, onto or from the covered "auto"; 

(2) 
Otherwise in the course of transit by or on behalf of the "insured"; or 

(3) 
Being stored, disposed of, treated or processed in or upon the covered "au­to"; 



b. 
Before the "pollutants" or any property in which the "pollutants" are contained are moved from the place where they are ac­cepted by the "insured" for movement into or onto the covered "auto"; or 

c. 
After the "pollutants" or any property in which the "pollutants" are contained are moved from the covered "auto" to the place where they are finally delivered, disposed of or abandoned by the "insured". 


Paragraph a. above does not apply to fuels, lu­bricants, fluids, exhaust gases or other similar "pollutants" that are needed for or result from the normal electrical, hydraulic or mechanical functioning of the covered "auto" or its parts, if: 
(1) 
The "pollutants" escape, seep, migrate or are discharged, dispersed or released directly from an "auto" part designed by its manufacturer to hold, store, receive or dispose of such "pollutants"; and 

(2) 
The "bodily injury", "property damage" or "covered pollution cost or expense"does not arise out of the operation of any equipment listed in Paragraph 6.b. or 6.c. of the definition of "mobile equipment". 



Page 10 of 12 © Insurance Services Office, Inc., 2009 CA 00 01s03s10 . 
Paragraphs b. and c. above do not apply to "accidents" that occur away from premisesowned by or rented to an "insured" with respect to "pollutants" not in or upon a covered "auto" if: 
(a) 
The "pollutants" or any property in which the "pollutants" are contained are upset, overturned or damaged as a result of the maintenance or use of a covered "auto"; and 

(b) 
The discharge, dispersal, seepage, mi­gration, release or escape of the "pollut­ants" is caused directly by such upset, overturn or damage. 


E. "Diminution in value" means the actual or per­ceived loss in market value or resale value which results from a direct and accidental "loss". 
F. "Employee" includes a "leased worker". "Em­ployee" does not include a "temporary worker". 
G. "Insured" means any person or organization quali­fying as an insured in the Who Is An Insured pro­vision of the applicable coverage. Except with re­spect to the Limit of Insurance, the coverage af­forded applies separately to each insured who is seeking coverage or against whom a claim or "suit" is brought. 
H. "Insured contract" means: 
1. 
A lease of premises; 

2. 
A sidetrack agreement; 

3. 
Any easement or license agreement, except in connection with construction or demolition op­erations on or within 50 feet of a railroad; 

4. 
An obligation, as required by ordinance, to in­demnify a municipality, except in connection with work for a municipality; 

5. 
That part of any other contract or agreementpertaining to your business (including an in­demnification of a municipality in connection with work performed for a municipality) under which you assume the tort liability of another to pay for "bodily injury" or "property damage" to a third party or organization. Tort liability means a liability that would be imposed by law in the absence of any contract or agreement; 

6. 
That part of any contract or agreement entered into, as part of your business, pertaining to the rental or lease, by you or any of your "employ­ees", of any "auto". However, such contract or agreement shall not be considered an "insured contract" to the extent that it obligates you or any of your "employees" to pay for "property damage" to any "auto" rented or leased by you or any of your "employees". 


An "insured contract" does not include that part of any contract or agreement: 
a. 
That indemnifies a railroad for "bodily injury" or "property damage" arising out of con­struction or demolition operations, within 50 feet of any railroad property and affectingany railroad bridge or trestle, tracks, road­beds, tunnel, underpass or crossing; 

b. 
That pertains to the loan, lease or rental of an "auto" to you or any of your "employ­ees", if the "auto" is loaned, leased or rented with a driver; or 

c. 
That holds a person or organization en­gaged in the business of transporting prop­erty by "auto" for hire harmless for your use of a covered "auto" over a route or territory that person or organization is authorized to serve by public authority. 



I. "Leased worker" means a person leased to you by a labor leasing firm under an agreement between you and the labor leasing firm to perform duties re­lated to the conduct of your business. "Leased worker" does not include a "temporary worker". 
J. "Loss" means direct and accidental loss or dam­age. 
K. "Mobile equipment" means any of the followingtypes of land vehicles, including any attached ma­chinery or equipment: 
1. 
Bulldozers, farm machinery, forklifts and other vehicles designed for use principally off public roads; 

2. 
Vehicles maintained for use solely on or next to premises you own or rent; 

3. 
Vehicles that travel on crawler treads; 

4. 
Vehicles, whether self-propelled or not, main­tained primarily to provide mobility to perma­nently mounted: 

a. 
Power cranes, shovels, loaders, diggers or drills; or 

b. 
Road construction or resurfacing equipment such as graders, scrapers or rollers; 



5. 
Vehicles not described in Paragraph 1., 2., 3. or 4. above that are not self-propelled and are maintained primarily to provide mobility to per­manently attached equipment of the following types: 

a. 
Air compressors, pumps and generators,including spraying, welding, building clean­ing, geophysical exploration, lighting and well-servicing equipment; or 

b. 
Cherry pickers and similar devices used to raise or lower workers; or 




CA 00 01s0310 © Insurance Services Office, Inc., 2009 Page 11 of 12 . 
6. Vehicles not described in Paragraph 1., 2., 3. or 4. above maintained primarily for purposes other than the transportation of persons or car­go. However, self-propelled vehicles with the following types of permanently attached equipment are not "mobile equipment" but will be considered "autos": 
a. Equipment designed primarily for: 
(1) 
Snow removal; 

(2) 
Road maintenance, but not construction or resurfacing; or 

(3) 
Street cleaning; 

b. 
Cherry pickers and similar devices mounted on automobile or truck chassis and used to raise or lower workers; and 

c. 
Air compressors, pumps and generators,including spraying, welding, building clean­ing, geophysical exploration, lighting or well-servicing equipment. 


However, "mobile equipment" does not include land vehicles that are subject to a compulsory or financial responsibility law or other motor vehicle insurance law where it is licensed or principally ga­raged. Land vehicles subject to a compulsory or financial responsibility law or other motor vehicle insurance law are considered "autos". 
L. "Pollutants" means any solid, liquid, gaseous or thermal irritant or contaminant, including smoke, vapor, soot, fumes, acids, alkalis, chemicals and waste. Waste includes materials to be recycled, reconditioned or reclaimed. 
M. "Property damage" means damage to or loss of use of tangible property. 
N. "Suit" means a civil proceeding in which: 
1. Damages because of "bodily injury" or "prop­
erty damage"; or 

2. A "covered pollution cost or expense"; to which this insurance applies, are alleged. "Suit" includes: 
a. 
An arbitration proceeding in which such damages or "covered pollution costs or ex­penses" are claimed and to which the "in­sured" must submit or does submit with our consent; or 

b. 
Any other alternative dispute resolution proceeding in which such damages or "covered pollution costs or expenses" are claimed and to which the insured submits wth our consent. 


is

0. "Temporary worker" means a person who is fur­nished to you to substitute for a permanent "em­ployee" on leave or to meet seasonal or short-term workload conditions. 
P. "Trailer" includes semitrailer. 
Page 12 of 12 © Insurance Services Office, Inc., 2009 CA 00 01s03s10 . 
WORKERS COMPENSATION AND EMPLOYERS LIABILITY INSURANCE POLICY WC 04 03 06 
(Ed. 4-84) 

WAIVER OF OUR RIGHT TO RECOVER FROM OTHERS ENDORSEMENT-CALIFORNIA 
We have the right to recover our payments from anyone liable for an injury covered by this policy. We will not enforce our right against the person or organization named in the Schedule. (This agreement applies only to the extent that you per­form work under a written contract that requires you to obtain this agreement from us.) 
You must maintain payroll records accurately segregating the remuneration of your employees while engaged in the work described in the Schedule. 
The additional premium for this endorsement shall be O . 0 2 0 % of the California workers' compensation premium otherwise due on such remuneration. 
Schedule 
Person or Organization 
Blanket Waiver of Subrogation as required by written 

Job Description 
contracts. 

This endorsement changes the policy to whsch it is attached and is effective on the date issued unless otherwise stated.
is

(The Information below Is required only when this endorsement is issued subsequent to preparation of the policy.) 
Endorsement Effective Date: 0 6 / 3 0 / 2 0 2 0 
Policy Effective Date: 06/30/2020 to 06/30/2021 Insured: Alpha Project for the Homeless 
OBA: 
Carrier Name I Code: Service American Indemnity Company Endorsement No. Premiums$ 
Countersigned by ______________ 
WC 04 03 06 
(Ed. 4-84) 
Page 1 of 1 






