
AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE CITY OF ESCONDIDO AND INTERFAITH COMMUNITY SERVICES FOR THE ALLIANCE FOR REGIONAL SOLUTIONS CFDA 14.218 
FOR THE USE OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT FUNDS 
This Agreement made and entered into by and between the City of Escondido, a municipal corporation of the state of California, hereinafter "CITY," and Interfaith Community Services, for the Alliance for Regional Solutions, hereinafter "SUBRECIPIENT." 
WITNESSETH: RECITALS: 
1. 
CITY is recipient of funds from the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (hereinafter "HUD") pursuant to Title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (41 U.S.C. 5301-5320) as amended (hereinafter "ACT"). 

2. 
CITY has approved the provision of federal funds under the Act to be used by the SUBRECIPIENT as provided in its "Work Plan," attached hereto as Attachment "A" and as further modified by any negotiated Statement of Work. 

3. 
SUBRECIPIENT represents that it shall perform the work as set forth in the Work Plan and Statement of Work. 

4. 
SUBRECIPIENT warrants that it has the expertise and experience to perform the work set forth in the Work Plan and Statement of Work. 

5. 
SUBRECIPIENT represents that it shall perform the work as set forth in the Work Plan and Statement of Work pursuant to the "Budget," attached hereto as Attachment "B" and incorporated herein by reference. 

6. 
CITY shall provide Community Development Block Grant "CDBG" funds to the SUBRECIPIENT in the amount set forth in the Budget, and pursuant to the terms of this Agreement. 


NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing recitals and based on the mutual covenants below, the parties hereby agree as follows: 
1. 
The term of this Agreement shall be FY 2019-2020 (July 1, 2019 -June 30, 2020). 


Page 1 of 18 
2. 
Upon the termination or expiration of the term of this Agreement, SUBRECIPIENT shall transfer to CITY any CDBG funds on hand at the time of such termination or expiration and any accounts receivable attributable to the use of CDBG funds. 

A. SUBRECIPIENT OBLIGATIONS 
1. Use of Funds. SUBRECIPIENT agrees to use federal funds provided by CITY to SUBRECIPIENT pursuant to the provisions of this Agreement, the Work Plan and Statement of Work, and Budget for said program. SUBRECIPIENT'S failure to perform as required may, in addition to other remedies set forth in this Agreement, result in readjustment of the amount of funds CITY is otherwise obligated to pay to SUBRECIPIENT under Section B hereof. 
SUBRECIPIENT agrees to use said funds to pay for necessary and reasonable costs to operate said program. Said amount shall include wages, administrative costs, employee benefits comparable to other similarly situated employees, and other allowable program costs as detailed in the Budget. 
If SUBRECIPIENT uses the federal funds provided by CITY for the purpose of acquisition of real property or to reduce the cost of financing of acquisition of real property, there shall be no alteration of the use of the real property so acquired and no additional encumbrances placed on such property during the period of this agreement without the prior written consent of CITY, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
SUBRECIPIENT shall, upon receipt of such federal funds for the purpose of acquiring or improving real property, cause a Deed of Trust, secured by a Promissory Note, to be executed and recorded, in favor of the CITY, for the amount of the federal funds provided by the CITY. 
If SUBRECIPIENT uses federal funds provided by the CITY as set out in the preceding paragraph, and further encumbers the real property acquired without first giving notice to the CITY, and obtaining the CITY's written consent, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld, such action on the part of the SUBRECIPIENT will be cause for termination or revocation of this Agreement and reversion of assets as delineated in paragraph A.(15.) or collection on any Promissory Note executed in favor of the CITY. 
2. 
Statement of Work. SUBRECIPIENT represents that it will negotiate a Statement of Work in accordance with the Work Plan that will include an accurate schedule for performance 
Page 2 of 18 
3. 
4. 
5. 
and completion of the work. These items shall be in sufficient detail to provide a sound 
basis for the City to effectively monitor performance under the Agreement. Budget. SUBRECIPIENT represents that the Budget includes only allowable costs and an accurate analysis of costs applicable to CDBG funds pursuant to 24 CFR 570.502, which includes requirements for compliance with the following in addition to other requirements as stated in 2 CFR Part 200 Subpart E -Cost Principles. 
These items shall be in sufficient detail to provide a sound basis for the City to effectively 
monitor performance under the Agreement. Records and Reports. The SUBRECIPIENT shall maintain records and reports as required by Federal Regulation 24 CFR 570.506 and 570.503, 2 CFR Part 200.333-227, and 24 CFR 85.32-34 which may include but are not limited to: 
a. 
Records. 

(1) 
Documentation providing a full description of the activity undertaken. 

(2) 
Documentation demonstrating that each activity undertaken meets one of the National Objectives of the CDBG program. 

(3) 
Documentation of the number, race and income level of persons and/or families participating in or benefiting the SUBRECIPIENT'S program. 

(4) 
Documentation of all CDBG funds received from CITY. 

(5) 
Documentation of expenses as identified in the Budget. 

(6) 
Property and equipment acquisition, management and disposition documentation. 

(7) 
Any such other related records as CITY shall require. 



b. 
Reports.

(1) 
Payment Request/Invoice 

(2) 
Quarterly Performance and Demographic Reports 

(3) 
Final Evaluation Report 




(4) Any such other reports as CITY shall reasonably require. Program Income. Transfers of grant funds by the City to the SUBRECIPIENT shall be 
adjusted according to the principles described in 24 CFR 570.504(b)(2), and 24CFR570.504(c). Any program income on hand when this Agreement expires, or 
Page 3 of 18 


received after this Agreement's expiration, shall be paid to the CITY as required by Section 
A.15 of this Agreement and 24 CFR 570.503(b)(8). 
6. 
Uniform Administrative Requirements. The SUBRECIPIENT shall comply with applicable uniform administrative requirements as described in 24 CFR 570.502, 2 CFR Part 200, and 24 CFR 570 Subpart K. 

7. 
Separation of Accounts. All funds received by SUBRECIPIENT from City pursuant to this Agreement shall be maintained separate and apart from any other fund of SUBRECIPIENT or of any principal or member of SUBRECIPIENT in an account in a federally insured banking or savings and loan institution. No monies shall be withdrawn from such account except for expenditures authorized by this Agreement. 

8. 
Retention of Records. All accounting records and evidence pertaining to all costs of SUBRECIPIENT and all documents related to this Agreement shall be kept available at SUBRECIPIENT'S office or place of business for the duration of the Agreement and thereafter for three (3) years after completion of an audit. Records which relate to (a) complaints, claims, administrative proceedings or litigation arising out of the performance of this Agreement, or (b) costs and expenses of this Agreement to which CITY or any other governmental agency takes exception, shall be retained beyond the three (3) years until resolution or disposition of such appeals, litigation claims, or exceptions.

9. 
Compliance with Applicable Laws. SUBRECIPIENT agrees to comply fully with all applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances, regulations, and permits including but not limited to federal CDBG financial and contractual procedures, and 2 CRF Part 200, as set forth in 24 CFR 570.502(b). Said federal documents are on file in the City of Escondido Community Development Block Grant Division, 201 N. Broadway, Escondido, CA 92025, and are incorporated herein by reference. The SUBRECIPIENT shall secure any new permits required by authorities herein with jurisdiction over the project, and shall maintain all presently required permits. The SUBRECIPIENT shall ensure that the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act are met for any permits or other entitlements required to carry out the terms of this Agreement. 


SUBRECIPIENT agrees to comply fully with all applicable federal, state and local laws, 
ordinances, regulations, and permits regarding provision of services to non-U.S. citizens. No federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid, by or on behalf of it, to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of an agency, a 
Page 4 of 18 
Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress in connection with the awarding of any federal contract, the making of anyfederal grant, the making of any federal loan, the entering into of any cooperativeagreement, and the extension, continuation, renewal, amendment, or modification of any federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement;If any funds other than federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid to anyperson for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress in connection with this federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperativeagreement, it will complete and submit Standard Form LLL, "Disclosure Form to ReportLobbying," in accordance with its instructions. 
10. Affirmative Action Policy.
a. Provision of Program Services. 
(1) 
SUBRECIPIENT shall not, on the ground of race, color, national origin, sex or disability, exclude any person from participation in, deny person the benefits of, or subject any person to discrimination under any program or activity funded in whole or in part with CDBG funds. 

(2) 
SUBRECIPIENT shall not, under any program or activity funded in whole or in part with CDBG funds, on the ground of race, color, national origin, sex or disability:

(a) 
Deny any facilities, services, financial aid or other benefits provided under the program or activity.

(b) 
Provide any facilities, services, financial aid or other benefits which are different or are provided in a different form from that provided to others under the program or activity.

(c) 
Subject to segregated or separate treatment in any facility in, or in anymatter of process related to receipt of any service or benefit under the program or activity.

(d) 
Restrict in any way access to, or in the enjoyment of any advantage or privilege enjoyed by others in connection with facilities, services,financial aid or other benefits under the program or activity. 

(e) 
Treat an individual differently from others in determining whether the individual satisfies any admission, enrollment, eligibility, membership, or other requirement or condition which the individual must meet in order to be provided any facilities, services or other benefit provided under the program or activity as an employee. 

(f) 
Deny an opportunity to participate in a program or activity as an employee.



(3) 
SUBRECIPIENT may not utilize criteria or methods of administration which have the effect of subjecting individuals to discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex or disability, or have the effect of defeating or substantially impairing accomplishment of the objectives of the program or activity with respect to individuals of a particular race, color, national origin, sex or disability. 

(4) 
SUBRECIPIENT, in determining the site or location of housing or facilities provided in whole or in part with CDBG funds, may not make selections of such site or location which have the effect of excluding individuals from, denying them the benefits of, or subjecting them to discrimination on the ground of race, color, national origin, sex or disability, or which have the purpose or effect of defeating or substantially impairing the accomplishment of the objectives of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and amendments thereto. 

(5) 
(a) In administering a program or activity funded in whole or in part with CDBG funds regarding which the SUBRECIPIENT has previously discriminated against persons on the ground of race, color, national original, sex or disability, the SUBRECIPIENT must take affirmative action to overcome the effects of prior discrimination. 


Page 5 of 18 

(b) Even in the absence of such prior discrimination, a SUBRECIPIENT in administering a program or activity funded in whole or in part with CDBG funds should take affirmative action to overcome the effects of conditions which would otherwise result in limiting participation by persons of a particular race, color, national origin, sex or disability, to exclude individuals from participation in, to deny them the benefits of, or to subject them to discrimination under any program or activity to which CDBG funding applies, the SUBRECIPIENT has an obligation to 
Page 6 of 18 
take reasonable action to remove or overcome the consequences of the prior discriminatory practice or usage, and to accomplish the purpose of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. 
(c) A SUBRECIPIENT shall not be prohibited by this part from taking any eligible action to ameliorate any imbalance in services or facilities provided to any geographic area or specific group of persons within its jurisdiction where the purpose of such action is to overcome priordiscriminatory practice or usage. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in Sections A.10.a(l-5), nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit any SUBRECIPIENT from maintaining or constructing separate living facilities or rest room facilities for the different sexes. Furthermore, selectivity on the basis of sex is not prohibited when institutional or custodial services can properly be performed only by a member of the same sex as the recipients of the services. 
b. Employment Discrimination. 
(1) 
SUBRECIPIENT shall not discriminate against any employee or application for employment because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age or disability. SUBRECIPIENT shall take affirmative action to insure that applicants are employed, and that employees are treated duringemployment, without regard to their race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age or disability. Such action shall include, but not be limited to, the following: employment, upgrading, demotion or transfer, recruitment or recruitment advertising, layoff or termination, rate of pay or other forms of compensation and selection for training including apprenticeship. SUBRECIPIENT agrees to post in conspicuous places available to employees and applicants for employment, notices setting forth the provisions of this nondiscrimination clause. 

(2) 
SUBRECIPIENT shall, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees 


placed by or on behalf of SUBRECIPIENT, state that all qualified applications will receive 
consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age or disability. 
(3) SUBRECIPIENT shall send to each labor union or representative of workers with which it has a collective bargaining agreement or other contractor 
Page 7 of 18 understanding, a notice to be provided by CITY'S contracting officers advising the labor union or workers' representative of SUBRECIPIENT'S commitments under Section 202 of Executive Order No. 11246 of September 14, 1965, and shall post copies of the notices in conspicuous places available to employees and applicants for employment. 
(4) 
SUBRECIPIENT shall comply with all provisions of Executive Order 11246 of September 24, 1965, and of the rules, regulations, and relevant orders of the Secretary of Labor. 

(5) 
SUBRECIPIENT shall furnish to the CITY all information and reports required by Executive Order No. 11246 of September 24, 1965, and by the related rules, regulations, and orders. 

(6) 
In the event of SUBRECIPIENT'S failure to comply with any rules, regulations, or orders required to be complied with pursuant to this Agreement, CITY may cancel, terminate, or suspend in whole or in part its performance and SUBRECIPIENT may be declared ineligible for further government contracts in accordance with procedures authorized in Executive Order No. 11246 of September 24, 1965, and such other sanctions as may be imposed and remedies invoked as provided in Executive Order No. 11246 of September 24, 1965, or by rule, regulation, or order of the Secretary of Labor, or as otherwise provided by law. 

(7) 
SUBRECIPIENT shall include the provisions of Section A.10.B, "Affirmative Action Policy," Paragraphs 1 through 6, in every subcontract or purchase order unless exempted by rules, regulations, or order of the Secretary of Labor issued pursuant to Section 204 of Executive Order No. 11246 of September 24, 1965, so that such provisions will be binding upon each subcontractor or vendor. SUBRECIPIENT shall take such action with respect to any subcontractor or purchase order as the CITY may direct as a means of enforcing such provisions including sanctions for noncompliance: Provided, however, that in the event SUBRECIPIENT becomes involved in, or is threatened with, litigation with a subcontractor or vendor as a result of such direction by the CITY, SUBRECIPIENT may request the United States to enter into such litigation to protect the interests of the United States. 

(8) 
SUBRECIPIENT shall not discriminate on the basis of age in violation of any provision of the Age Discrimination Act of 1975 {42 U.S.C. 6101 et seq.) or with respect to any otherwise qualified handicapped individual as provided in Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794). 


Page 8 of 18 

SUBRECIPIENT shall also provide ready access to and use of all CDBG fund assisted buildings and programs to qualified persons with disabilities in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. 
(9) SUBRECIPIENT will provide a drug-free workplace by: 
(a) 
Publishing a statement notifying employees that the unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possession, or use of a controlled substance is prohibited in the grantee's workplace and specifying the actions that will be taken against employees for violation of such prohibition. 

(b) 
Establishing an ongoing drug-free awareness program to inform employees about: 


1) The dangers of drug abuse in the workplace. 
2) The grantee's policy of maintaining a drug-free workplace. 
3) Any available drug counseling, rehabilitation, and employee assistance programs. 
4) The penalties that may be imposed upon employees for drug 
abuse violations occurring in the workplace. Making it a requirement that each employee to be engaged in the performance of the grant be given a copy of the statement required by paragraph (a). 
Notifying the employee in the statement required by paragraph (a) that, as a condition of employment under the grant, the employee will: 
1) Abide by the terms of the statement. 
2) Notify the employer in writing of his or her conviction for a violation of a criminal drug statute occurring in the workplace no later than five (5) calendar days after such conviction. 
Notifying the agency, in writing, within ten (10) calendar days after receiving notice under subparagraph (d)(2) from an employee or 
Page 9 of 18 
otherwise receiving actual notice of such conviction. Employers of convicted employees must provide notice, including position title, to every grant officer or other designee on whose grant activity the convicted employee was working, unless the federal agency has designated a central point for the receipt of such notices. Notice shall include the identification number(s) of each affected grant. 
(f) Taking one of the following actions, within thirty (30) calendar days of receiving notice under subparagraph (d)(2), with respect to anyemployee who is so convicted: 
1) Taking appropriate personnel action against such an employee, up to and including termination, consistent with the requirements of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended; 
OR 
2) Requiring such employee to participate satisfactorily in a drug­abuse assistance or rehabilitation program approved for such purposes by a federal, state, or local health, law enforcement, or other appropriate agency. 
(g) Making a good faith effort to continue to maintain a drug-freeworkplace through implementation of paragraphs (a)-(f). 
(h) "Controlled substance" means a controlled substance in Schedules I through V of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 812) and as further defined by regulation (21 CFR 1308.11 through 1308.15). "Conviction" means a finding of guilt (through a plea of nolo contend re) or imposition of sentence, or both, by any judicial body charged with the responsibility to determine violations of the federal or state criminal drug statutes. "Criminal drug statute" means a federal or nonfederal criminal statute involving the manufacture, distribution, dispensing, use, or possession of any controlled substance. 
"Employee" means the employee of a SUBRECIPIENT directly engaged in the performance of work under this contract including: (i) All "direct charge" employees; (ii) all "indirect charge" employees unless their 
Page 10 of 18 

11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
impact or involvement is insignificant to the performance of the grant; and (iii) temporary personnel and consultants who are directly engaged in the performance of work under this contract and who are not on the SUBRECIPIENT'S payroll. This definition does not include workers not on the payroll of the SUBRECIPIENT (e.g., volunteers, even if used to meet a matching requirement; consultants or independent contractors not on the payroll; or employees of SUBRECIPIENTS or subcontractors in covered workplaces). 
C. 
Remedies. In the event of SUBRECIPIENT'S failure to comply with any rules, regulations, or orders required to be complied with pursuant to this Agreement, the CITY may cancel, terminate, or suspend in whole or in part its performance and SUBRECIPIENT may be declared ineligible for further government contracts and any such other sanctions as may be imposed and remedies invoked as provided by law. 
Ineligibility of Subrecipients of Contractors. SUBRECIPIENT shall not use CDBG funds directly or indirectly in its operations or to employ, award contracts to, or otherwise engage the services of, or fund any contractor during any period of debarment, suspension, or placement in ineligibility status of the SUBRECIPIENT or such contractor under the provisions of 24 CFR Part 24. 
Conflict of Interest. In the procurement of supplies, equipment, construction and services by SUBRECIPIENT, the conflict of interest provisions in 2 CFR Part 200.317-326 and 24 CFR 570.611 shall apply. 
Condition for Religious Organization. SUBRECIPIENT shall comply with all applicable conditions prescribed in 24 CFR 570.2000) and by HUD for the use of CDBG funds by religious organizations if SUBRECIPIENT is a religious organization. 
Suspension and Termination. In accordance with 24 CFR 85.43, suspension or termination may occur if SUBRECIPIENT materially fails to comply with any term of this Agreement and/or the award, of this Agreement and/or the award may be terminated for convenience in accordance with 24 CFR 85.44. 
Reversion of Assets. Upon termination or expiration of the term of this Agreement, the SUBRECIPIENT shall transfer to the CITY any CDBG funds on hand at the time of such termination or expiration and any accounts receivable attributable to the use of CDBG funds. Any real property under the SUBRECIPIENT'S control that was acquired or improved in whole or in part with CDBG funds shall either be: 
Page 11 of 18 
16. 
17. 
18. 

a. 
Used to meet one of the national objectives stated in 24 CFR 570.208 until five (5) years after termination or expiration of this Agreement, or for such longer periods of time as determined to be appropriate by the CITY; or 

b. 
Disposed of in a manner that results in the CITY'S being reimbursed in the amount of the current fair market value of the property less any portion of the value attributable to expenditures of non-CDBG funds for acquisition of, or improvement to, the property. Reimbursement to the CITY shall not be required after the period of time specified in Section A.15.a of this Agreement. 


Independent Contractor. SUBRECIPIENT agrees that the performance of obligations hereunder are rendered in its capacity as an independent contractor and that it is in no way an employee or agent of the CITY. 
Licensing. SUBRECIPIENT agrees to obtain and maintain all licenses, registrations, accreditations, and inspections from all agencies governing its operations. SUBRECIPIENT shall insure that its staff shall also obtain and maintain all required licenses, registrations, accreditations, and inspections from all agencies governing SUBRECIPIENT'S operations hereunder. 
Inspection of Records. CITY and the United States government and/or their representatives shall have access for purposes of monitoring, auditing, and examining SUBRECIPIENT'S activities and performance, to books, documents and papers, and the right to examine records of SUBRECIPIENT'S subcontractors, bookkeepers and accountants, employees and participants in regard to said program. CITY and the United States government and/or their representative shall also schedule on-site monitoring at their discretion. Monitoring activities may also include, but are not limited to, questioning employees and participants in said program and entering any premises or any site in which any of the services or activities funded hereunder are conducted or in which any of the records of SUBRECIPIENT are kept. Nothing herein shall be construed to require access to any privileged or confidential information as set forth in federal or state law. SUBRECIPIENT agrees to provide notification of any audits or investigations, including 
copies of results, findings, and/or liens. In the event SUBRECIPIENT does not make the above-referenced documents available within the City of Escondido, California, SUBRECIPIENT agrees to pay all necessary and reasonable expenses incurred by CITY in conducting any audit at the location where said records and books of account are maintained. 
Page 12 of 18 
19. 
Assignability. SUBRECIPIENT shall not assign or transfer any interest in this Agreement, whether by assignment, delegation or novation, without the prior written consent of CITY; provided, however, that claims for money due or to become due to SUBRECIPIENT from CITY under this Agreement may be assigned to a bank, trust company or other financial institution, or to a trustee in bankruptcy, without such approval. Any assignment, delegation or novation other than as provided above shall be void and inoperative. Notice of any proper assignment or transfer shall be promptly furnished to CITY. 

20. 
Hold Harmless. 

a. 
SUBRECIPIENT shall indemnify and save harmless CITY, its officers and employees, from and against any and all damages to property or injuries to or death of any person or persons, including property and employees or agents of CITY, and shall defend, indemnify and save harmless CITY, its officers, and employees from and against any and all claims, demands, suits, actions or proceedings of any kind or nature, including, but not by way of limitation, workers' compensation claims, resulting from or arising out of the negligent acts, errors or omissions of SUBRECIPIENT, its employees or subcontractors. 

b. 
SUBRECIPIENT, shall indemnify and save harmless CITY, its officers, and employees from and against any and all damages to property or injuries to or death of any person or persons, including property, and employees or agents of CITY, and shall defend, indemnify and save harmless CITY, its officers, and employees from and against any and all claims, demands, suits, actions or proceedings therefrom, resulting from or arising out of the intentional or malicious acts of SUBRECIPIENT, its employees or subcontractors. 



21. 
Insurance. 


a. The SUBRECIPIENT shall secure and maintain at its own cost, for all operations, the following insurance coverage, unless reduced by the City Attorney: 
(1) 
General liability insurance. Occurrence basis with minimum limits of $1,000,000each occurrence, $2,000,000 General Aggregate, and $1,000,000Products/Completed Operations Aggregate; and 

(2) 
Automobile liability insurance of $1,000,000 combined single-limit per accident for bodily injury and property damage, unless waived as provided in 21(b) below; and 


Page 13 of 18 

(3) 
Workers' compensation and employer's liability insurance as required by the California Labor Code, as amended, or certificate of sole proprietorship; and 

(4) 
Errors and Omissions professional liability insurance with minimum coverage of 


$1,000,000. 
b. It is the parties' understanding that the use of a motor vehicle is not a primary subject of this Agreement. SUBRECIPIENT acknowledges that operating a motor vehicle is outside the scope of this Agreement and occurs only at the convenience of the SUBRECIPIENT. A waiver of automobile liability insurance is only effective if both sets 
of initials appear below, otherwise such ate is required. 
:a:tAcknowledged by SUBRECIPIENT 
Waiver appropriate by CITY _____ _ 
c. Each insurance policy required above must be acceptable to the City Attorney. 
(1) 
Each policy must provide for written notice within no more than thirty (30) days if cancellation or termination of the policy occurs. Insurance coverage must be provided by an A.M. Best's A-rated, class V carrier or better, admitted in California, or if non-admitted, a company that is not on the Department of Insurance list of unacceptable carriers. 

(2) 
All non-admitted carriers will be required to provide a service of suit 

(3) 
Both the General Liability and the Automobile Liability policies must name the 


endorsement in addition to the additional insured endorsement. 
CITY specifically as an additional insured under the policy on a separate endorsement 
page. The CITY includes its officials, employees, and volunteers. The endorsement must be ISO Form CG 20 10 11 85 edition or its equivalent for General Liability endorsements and CA 20 01 for Automobile Liability endorsements. 
(4) The General Liability policy must include coverage for bodily injury and property damage arising from SUBRECIPIENT'S work, including its on-going operations and 
products-completed operations hazard. 
(5) The General Liability policy must be primary and noncontributory and any 
insurance maintained by CITY is excess. 
Page 14 of 18 
d. In executing this Agreement, SUBRECIPIENT agrees to have completed insurance documents on file with the CITY within fourteen (14) days after the date of execution. Failure to comply with insurance requirements under this Agreement will be a material breach of this Agreement, resulting in immediate termination at CITY's option. 
B. CITY OBLIGATIONS 
1. 
Payment of Funds. CITY shall pay to SUBRECIPIENT from CDBG funds, when, if and to the extent received from HUD, amounts expended by SUBRECIPIENT in carrying out said program pursuant to this Agreement up to a maximum aggregate payment of $45,000 in installments determined by CITY. Payment shall be made to SUBRECIPIENT through the submission of monthly invoices, in a form prescribed by CITY, detailing such expenses. CITY shall pay such invoices within thirty {30) days after receipt thereof, provided CITY is satisfied that such expenses have been incurred within the scope of this Agreement and that SUBRECIPIENT is in compliance with the terms and conditions of this Agreement, including 2 CFR Part 200 Subpart F. 

2. 
Audit of Account. CITY shall include an audit of the account maintained by SUBRECIPIENT pursuant to Section A.8 of this Agreement in CITY'S annual audit of all CDBG funds pursuant to federal regulations found in Title 24 of the Code of Federal Regulations and other applicable federal laws and regulations. 


C. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS. 
1. Termination of Agreement. CITY or SUBRECIPIENT may terminate this Agreement by giving written notice to the other party thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of termination. Additionally, the CITY shall have the right, in accordance with 24 CFR 85.43, to terminate this Agreement immediately or withhold payment of any invoice for failure of the SUBRECIPIENT to comply with the terms and conditions of this Agreement. Should the CITY decide to terminate this Agreement after a full evaluation of all circumstances has been completed, the SUBRECIPIENT shall, upon written request, have the right to an appeal process. A copy of the appeal process will be attached to any termination notice. 
If the CITY finds that the SUBRECIPIENT has violated the terms and conditions of this Agreement, the SUBRECIPIENT may be required to: 
a. 
repay all monies received from the CITY under this Agreement; and/or 

b. 
transfer possession of all materials and equipment purchased with grant money to 


Page 15 of 18 

the CITY. In the case of early termination, a final payment may be made to the SUBRECIPIENT upon receipt of a final payment may be made to the SUBRECIPIENT upon receipt of a Final Report and invoices covering eligible costs incurred prior to termination. The total of all payments, including the final payment, shall not exceed the amount specified in this Agreement. 
3. Notices. All notices to the parties required by this Agreement shall be in writing and 
addressed as follows: 
TO CITY: City of Escondido Housing and Neighborhood Services Division 201 N. Broadway Escondido, CA 92025 
TO SUBRECIPIENT: Alliance for Regional Solutions 550 West Washington Ave Escondido, CA 92025 
3. 
Exclusivity and Amendment of Agreement. This Agreement supersedes any and all other agreements, either oral or in writing, between the parties hereto with respect to the services of SUBRECIPIENT and provision of CDBG funds by CITY and contains all the covenants and agreements between the parties with respect to the conditions of said services and funding in any manner whatsoever. Each party to this Agreement acknowledges that no representations, inducements, promises or agreements, orally or otherwise, have been made by any party, or anyone acting on behalf of any party, which are not embodied herein, and that no other agreement or amendment hereto shall be effective unless executed in writing and signed by both CITY and SUBRECIPIENT. 

4. 
Laws Governing This Agreement. This Agreement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the state of California, all applicable federal statutes and regulations as amended, and all applicable local laws. 

5. 
Severability. The invalidity in whole or in part of any provision of this agreement shall not void or affect the validity of any other provisions of this Agreement. 

6. 
Construction of Agreement. The provisions of this Agreement and its Exhibits shall be construed as a whole. The captions preceding the text of each section are included only for 


Page 16 of 18 

convenience of reference and shall be disregarded in the construction and interpretation of this Agreement. 
7. 
Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986. SUBRECIPIENT shall keep itself informed of and comply with the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986. SUBRECIPIENT affirms that as an employer in the State of California, all new employees must produce proof of eligibility to work in the United States within the first three days of employment and that only employees legally eligible to work in the United States will be employed on this public project. SUBRECIPIENT agrees to comply with such provisions before commencing and continuously throughout the performance of this Agreement. 
Page 17 of 18 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, CITY and SUBRECIPIENT have caused this Agreement to be executed by their duly authorized representatives. 
SUBRECIPIENT 
/_By.=----------,,­
Chief Executive Officer 
President of Board of Directors 

(above signatures must be notarized) 
CITY OF ESCONDIDO 
Bill Martin 

Director of Community Development 
APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
1 
Date: ____.0;1t1 _t_o--+-I-'--'11---­
,/1111 
.....,_ 
, 
('; /2.'. pjJ) l7' 
____.__ 
Date: --=,;.........,,,'----'.+v+-,7 1____ 
. 
/ i /J 
_,al-1>! _1t.· , +tI -+ 
Date: __ (_f"1'-----­
,, I I I 
Date: __ '1t/_1-_3_,/t"'---­
--4-....___1 

Page 18 of 18 
CALIFORNIA ALL-PURPOSE ACKNOWLEDGMENT CIVIL CODE § 1189 
A notary public or other officer completing this certificate verifies only the identity of the individual who signed the document to which this certificate is attached, and not the truthfulness, accuracy, or validity of that document. 
State of Californiae
County of ,--=-10"'-J2ie.
!: 
On "'/as/do,a.. before me, --------'i,___,__,OV\'---'-'.-=--µt\.,_._'-=..:........::..'---''ee"4;.==--+-, __,_---=...........-=+--­
.de.e'-----=--'= dA.(e{bh@
I
1 Date H!Jle lnsett Name and Title of the O.r 
.J-a... @J W,.=e=fe..-----­
personally appeared .G....,.=1.AA'"--+-.fu4.)e=.___.ttf'-,::f11""'--{o;..._._---= -b. 
_; Name(s) of Signer(s) 
who proved to me on the basis of satisfactory evidence to be the person(s) whose name(s) is/are subscribed to the within instrument and acknowledged to me that he/she/they executed the same in his/her/their authorized capacity(ies), and that by his/her/their signature(s) on the instrument the person(s), or the entity upon behalf of which the person(s) acted, executed the instrument. 
I certify under PENALTY OF PERJURY under the laws of the State of California that the foregoing paragraphis true and correct. 

WITNESS my han 
official seal. 
Signature___._..lnlW...i....:::::::__ 

Place Notary Seal Above 
---------------OPTIONAL--------------­
Though this section is optional, completing this information can deter alteration of the document or fraudulent reattachment of this form to an unintended document. 
Description of Attached Document 
Title or Type of Document: Aes Cm11.aar± Document Date: -------­
Number of Pages: ___ Signer(s) Other Than Named Above: _____________ 
Capacity(ies) Claimed by Signer(s) 
Signer's Name: _________e_ _e_ 
D Corporate Officer -Title(s): _______ D Corporate Officer -Title(s): _______ 
D Partner -D Limited D General . Partner -D Limited D General 
D Individual . Attorney in Fact D Individual D Attorney in Fact
. Trustee D Guardian or Conservator . Trustee . Guardian or Conservator 
D Other: _______________ D Other: ______________ 
Signer Is Representing: _________ Signer Is Representing: _________ 
©2014 National Notary Association• www.NationalNotary.org • 1-800-US NOTARY (1-800-876-6827) Item #5907 
ATTACHMENT A Project Workplan Fiscal Year 2019-2020 
Organization: Alliance for Regional Solutions 
Project Title: Bridge to Housing Network 
Goal Statement: Provide 180 homeless individuals with not only a safe haven, but also with the tools and motivation necessary to move them towards self-sufficiency and their maximum level of independent and responsible functioning. By doing this, the Bridge to Housing Network works towards bridging clients out of homelessness and into their own permanent homes. 
Objective: One-By June 30, 2020, the Bridge to Housing Network will provide shelter for a minimum of 180 homeless community members. 
Key Activities 
Outreach to homeless populations and providers serving the homeless 
Screen all applicants for eligibility 
Enter all client into CES and complete VI-SPDAT assessment on clients who are eligible
Provide shelter orientation and offer all eligible-related services 
1 of 3 
Date 
July 1, 2019-June 30, 2020 July 1, 2019-June 30, 2020 
July 1, 2019-June 30, 2020 
July 1, 2019-June 30, 2020 
ATTACHMENT A Project Workplan Fiscal Year 2019-2020 
Organization: Alliance for Regional Solutions 
Project Title: Bridge to Housing Network 
Goal Statement: Provide 180 homeless individuals with not only a safe haven, but also with the tools and motivation necessary to move them towards self-sufficiency and their maximum level of independent and responsible functioning. By doing this, the Bridge to Housing Network works towards bridging clients out of homelessness and into their own permanent homes. 
Objective: Two-By June 30, 2020, 90% of these homeless community members will be offered to be case-managed social services focused on permanent housing. 
Date
Key Activities 
Offer weekly case management and supportive services 
Develop individualized service plan for t!1,ose clients accepting case management, to identify and work towards client goals around housing and self-sufficiency 
Assist clients with obtaining all required identification documents for housing 
Provide referrals/placement to long term housing programs 
Provide referrals to community resources and supports as needed 
Provide access/referrals to employment services 
Provide job search assistance 
Conduct weekly case conferencing with all shelter staff to review those clients in case management and their barriers to achieving housing goals 
2 of 3 
July 1, 2019-June 30, 2020 
July 1, 2019-June 30, 2020 July 1, 2019-June 30, 2020 July 1, 2019-June 30, 2020 July 1, 2019-June 30, 2020 July 1, 2019-June 30, 2020 July 1, 2019-June 30, 2020 July 1, 2019-June 30, 2020 
ATTACHMENT A Project Workplan Fiscal Year 2019-2020 
Organization: Alliance for Regional Solutions 
Project Title: Bridge to Housing Network 
Goal Statement: Provide 180 homeless individuals with not only a safe haven, but also with the tools and motivation necessary to move them towards self-sufficiency and their maximum level of independent and responsible functioning. By doing this, the Bridge to Housing Network works towards bridging clients out of homelessness and into their own permanent homes. 
Objective: Three-By June 30, 2020, 40% of these homeless community members will exit to a stable housing destination. 
Key Activities Date 
Provide weekly case management and supportive services 
Assist clients with obtaining all required identification documents for housing 
Follow up weekly on client's individualized service plan, and monitor progress towards client goals around housing and self­sufficiency
Provide referrals/placement to long term housing programs and advocate and help facilitate successful housing placement 
Provide referrals to community resources and supports as needed 
Provide access/referrals to employment Services 
Provide job search assistance 
Conduct weekly case conferencing with all shelter staff to review client's barriers to achieving housing goals 
3 of 3 
July 1, 2019-June 30, 2020 July 1, 2019-June 30, 2020 
July 1, 2019-June 30, 2020 
July 1, 2019-June 30, 2020 July 1, 2019-June 30, 2020 July 1, 2019-June 30, 2020 
July 1, 2019-June 30, 2020 
July 1, 2019-June 30, 2020 
ATTACHMENT B BUDGET Fiscal Year 2019-2020 
Organization: Alliance for Regional Solutions Project Title: Bridge to Shelter Network 
ESCONDIDO  OTHER FUNDS  
ITEM  FUNDING  AMOUNT  SOURCE  
Personnel  

PERSONNEL Salaries: $34,079.8 
1. 
Project Coordinator, $4,300/month @ 5% for 12 months =$2,580 

2. 
Shelter Manager, $4,475/month @ 10% for 12 months = $5,370 

3. 
Resident Coordinator(s), 

$2,687 /month @ 25% for 12 months = $8,131 

4. 
Intake Specialist, $2,773/month @ 


20% for 12 months = $6,655.2 
s. Case Manager, $3,151 @ 30% for 12 months = $11,343.60 
Benefits: 
33% of salaries for personnel #1-5 
Other Bridge to Housing Network Salaries 
and Benefits 
Total Salaries and Benefits 
OPERATING EXPENSES: 
1. 
Direct Client Supportive Services (meals, hygiene, bus passes) 

2. 
Occupancy expenses and insurance 

3. 
Other expenses 


2,580 5,370 
8,131 
6,655.20 
$11,343.60 
$10,920.2 
0 45,000.00 
49,020 48,330 
24,113 
26,620.80 
26,470.40 
56,464.48 1,459,439.32 1,690,458 
0 176,720 
0 467,437 0 79,541 
State ESG, EFSP, private donations, 
Alliance for Regional Solutions {ARS), Funding from other North County cities 
Alliance for Regional Solutions (ARS), State ESG, EFSP, private donations, Funding from other North County cities 
PROJECT TOTAL 
51,600 
53,700 
32,244 
33,276 
33,376 
67,384.68 1,459,439.32 
1,735,458 
176,720 
467,437 79,541 
Total $45,000 $2,414,156 $2,459,156 


BUDGET NARRATIVE-BRIDGE TO HOUSING NETWORK 
The total cost of providing bridge housing and related services through the Alliance for Regional Solutions and Haven House is $2,459,156. This proposal respectfully requests $45,000 in CDBG funding from the City of Escondido. Alliance for Regional Solutions has also applied and secured additional funding from other North County Cities to support the Bridge to Housing Network, including Haven House, located in Escondido. Haven House is also funded by State ESG, San Diego Emergency Food and Shelter Program (EFSP), and private donations to Interfaith Community Services. 
Expenses: Personnel: 
Salaries: Salaries and benefits include all shelter staff for all six shelters in the Bridge to Housing Network, a totalof$1,735,458. The full salaries for each of the positions included in this proposalare below. Project Coordinator-Provides administrative support to the Bridge to Housing Network and conducts 
1. 
on-site reviews to ensure compliance with contracts. $4,300/month @ 5% for 12 months = $2,580. Full annual cost is $51,600. Shelter Manager -Provides day to day management and oversight for shelter 
2. 
$4,475/month @ 10% for 12 months= $ 5,370. Full annual cost is $53,700. Resident Coordinator(s) -Provide operations support and overnight coverage 
3. 
$2,687 /month @ 50% for 12 months = $16,262. Full annual cost is $32,244. 
Intake Specialist -Conducts screening and intakes for all potential and new shelter residents 
4. 
$2,773/month @ 30% for 12 months = $9,982.80. Full annual cost is $33,276. 
Case Manager -Provides case management to shelter residents focused on permanent housing. 
5. 
$3,151/month @ 30% for 12 months= $11,343.60. Full annual cost is $33,376. Benefits: Includes health and dental, social security, disability insurance, and life insurance. Estimated at 33% of salaries. $34,079.80 x 0.33 = $10,920.2; the balance of this is included under "Other Funds" 
Operating Expenses: 
1. 
Direct Client Supportive Services (meals, hygiene, bus passes) -$176,720 is the full annual cost for this line item. 

2. 
Occupancy expenses and insurance -$467,437 is the full annual cost for this line item. 

3. 
Other expenses -$79,541 is the total for all other expenses, including the full annual cost for the Bridge to Housing Network annual report. 






AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PLAN 
SUBRECIPIENT: 
Interfaith Community Services, Inc. STREET ADDRESS: 550 West Washington Ave. 
CITY, STATE, ZIP: Escondido, CA 92025 
TELEPHONE NUMBER: (760) 489-6380 
___;._____________________ _ 
IRS/ID: 95-3837714 
1. 
The SUBRECIPIENT named above is committed to a policy of Affirmative Action to ensure Equal Employment Opportunity in response to Executive Order 11246 and relevant requirements adopted by the City. 

2. 
The official designated by the named SUBRECIPIENT to be Equal Employment Officer is: 
Dennis Haggar 


The named SUBRECIPIENT will document fully its affirmative actions which will be at least as extensive as the following: 
a. 
Ensure and maintain a working environment free of harassment, intimidation, and coercion at all sites and in all facilities at which the SUBRECIPIENT's employees are assigned to work. The SUBRECIPIENT, where possible, will assign two (2) or more women to each construction project. The SUBRECIPIENT shall specifically ensure that all foremen, superintendents, and other on-site supervisory personnel are aware of, and carry out, the SUBRECIPIENT's obligation to maintain such a workingenvironment, with specific attention to minority or female individuals working at such sites or in such facilities. 

b. 
Establish and maintain a current list of minority and female recruitment sources, provide written notification to minority and female recruitment sources and to community organizations when the SUBRECIPIENT or its unions have employment opportunities available and maintain a record of the organizations' responses. 

c. 
Maintain a current file on the names, addresses and telephone numbers of each minority and female off-the-street applicant and minority organization and of what action was taken with respect to each such individual. If such individual was sent to the union hiring hall for referral and was not referred back to the SUBRECIPIENT by the union or, if referred, not employed by the SUBRECIPIENT, this shall be documented in the file with the reason therefor, along with whatever additional actions the SUBRECIPIENT mayhave taken. 

d. 
Provide immediate written notification to the Director when the union or unions with which the SUBRECIPIENT has a collective bargaining agreement has not referred to the SUBRECIPIENT a minority person or woman sent by the SUBRECIPIENT, or when the SUBRECIPIENT has 




Affirmative Action Plan 

e. 
f. 
g. 
h. 
i. 
j. 
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PLAN 
other information that the union referral process has impeded the SUBRECIPIENT's efforts to meet its obligations. 

Develop on-the-job training opportunities and/or participate in training programs for the area which expressly include minorities and women, including upgrading programs and apprenticeship and trainee programsrelevant to the SUBRECIPIENT's employment needs, especially those pro­grams funded or approved by the Department of Labor. The SUBRECIPIENT shall provide notice of these programs to the sources compiled under (b) above. 
Disseminate the SUBRECIPIENT's Equal Employment Opportunity policy by providing notice of the policy to unions and training programs and requesting their cooperation in assisting the SUBRECIPIENT in meeting its Equal Employment Opportunity obligations; by including it in any policy manual and collective bargaining agreement; by publicizing it in the company newspaper, annual report, etc.; by specific review of the policywith all management personnel and with all minority and female employees at least once a year and by posting the company Equal Employment Opportunity policy on bulletin boards accessible to all employees at each location where construction work is performed. 

Review, at least annually, the company's Equal Employment Opportunity Policy and Affirmative Action obligations under these Specifications with all employees having any responsibility for hiring, assignment, layoff, termination or other employment decisions including specific review of these items with on-site supervisory personnel such as Superintendents, General Foremen, etc., prior to the initiation of construction work at any job site. A written record shall be made and maintained identifying the time and place of these meetings, persons attending, subject matter discussed and disposition of the subject matter. 
Disseminate the SUBRECIPIENT's Equal Employment Opportunity policy externally by including it in any advertising in the news media, specificallyincluding minority and female news media and providing written notification to and discussing the SUBRECIPIENT's Equal Employment Opportunity policy with other SUBRECIPIENTs and Subcontractors with whom the SUBRECIPIENT does, or anticipates doing business. 
Direct its recruitment efforts, both oral and written, to minority, female and community organizations, to schools with minority and female students and to minority and female recruitment and training organizations serving the SUBRECIPIENT's recruitment area and employment needs. Not later than one (1) month prior to the date for the acceptance of applications for apprenticeship or other training by any recruitment source, the SUBRECIPIENT shall send written notification to organizations such as the above, describing the openings, screening procedures and tests to be used in the selection process. 
Encourage present minority and female employees to recruit other minority persons and women and where reasonable, provide after-school, summer 
Affirmative Action Plan 
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PLAN 
and vacation employment to minority and female youth, both on the site and in other areas of a SUBRECIPIENT's workforce. 
k. 
Validate all tests and other selection requirements where there is an obligation to do so. 

I. 
Conduct, at least annually, an inventory and evaluation at least of all minority and female personnel for promotional opportunities and encourage these employees to seek or to prepare for, through appropriate training, etc .• such opportunities. 

m. 
Ensure that seniority practices, job classifications, work assignments and other personnel practices do not have a discriminatory effect by continually monitoring all personnel and employment-related activities to ensure that the Equal Employment Opportunity policy and the SUBRECIPIENT's obligations under these Specifications are being carried out. 

n. 
Ensure that all facilities and company activities are non-segregated except that separate and single-user toilet and necessary changing facilities shall be provided to assure privacy between the sexes. 

o. 
Document and maintain a record of all solicitations of offers for subcontracts from minority and female Construction SUBRECIPIENTs and Suppliers, including circulation of solicitations to minority and female SUBRECIPIENT Associations and other business associations. 

p. 
Conduct a review, at least annually, of all supervisors' adherence to and performance under the SUBRECIPIENT's Equal Employment Opportunity policy and Affirmative Action obligations. 


4. SUBRECIPIENTs and SubSUBRECIPIENTs shall maintain all required records for a period of three years. or until audited, and permit access by City to all such 
recordf'\ _,
A / /1 __ 
Signed: 'L.,.c=----..Signed:e.--+---"----­
Equal Empfoy&,ent Officer Authorized Officer/Title 
Print: .?Jr/,e. . Print: GY-,. .A-v,/-\; \tt;,_ (J.O 
,; ) 
Dated: ' ( } ,. ( ( 4 Dated: 6/UI I tr 
Affirmative Action Plan 
3 

'

THE CONTRACTOR, SUBCONTRACTOR, SUBRECIPIENT, OWNER, DEVELOPER, NONPROFIT, OR SERVICE PROVIDER BY HIS/HER SIGNATURE(S) AFFIXED HERETO DECLARES UNDER PENAL TY OF PERJURY OR NON-COMPLIANCE ENFORCEMENT THAT: 
A. The work to be performed under this contract is subject to the requirements of Section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968, as amended, 12 
U.S.C. 1701 (u) (Section 3). The purpose of Section 3 is to ensure that employment and other economic opportunities generated by HUD assistance or HUD-assisted projectse· covered by Section 3, shall, to the greatest extent feasible, be directed to low-and very low-Income persons, particularly persons who are recipients of HUD assistance for housing. 
B. The parties to this contract agree to comply with HUD's regulations in 24 CFR part 135, which implement Section 3. As evidenced by their execution of this contract, the parties to this contract certify that they are under no contractual or other impediment that would. prevent them from complying with the part 135 regulations. 
C. The contractor agrees to send to each labor organization or representative of workers with which the contractor has a collective bargaining agreement or other understanding, if any, a notice advising the labor organization or workers' representative of the contractor's commitments under this Section 3 clause, and will post copies of the notice in conspicuous places at the work site where both employees and applicants for training and employment positions can see the notice. The notice shall describe the Section 3 preference, shall set forth minimum number and job titles subject to hire, availability of apprenticeship and training positions, the qualifications for each; and the name and location of the person(s) taking applications for each of the positions; and the anticipated date the work shall.begin. 
D. The contractor agrees to include this Section 3 clause in every subcontract subject to compliafl(?8 with regulations in 24 CFR part 135, and agrees to take appropriate action, as provided in an applicable provision of the subcontract or In this Section 3 clause, upon a finding that the subcontractor is in violation of the regulations In 24 CFR part 135. The contractor will not subcontract with any subcontractor where the contractor has notice or knowiedge that the subcontractor has been found in violation of the regulatlons in 24 CFR part 135. 
E. The contractor will certify that any vacant employment positions, inctudlng training positions, that are filled ( 1) after the contractor Is selected but before the contract Is executed, and (2} with persons other than those to whom the regulations of 24 CFR part 135 require employment opportunities to be directed, 
were not filled to circumvent the contractors obligations under 24 CFR part 135. 
Noncompliance with HUD's regulations in 24 CFR part 135 may result in. 
sanctions, termination of this contract for default, and debarment or suspension 
from future HUD assisted contracts. 
.  
Date  
Date  (,. ('2 'i;I ICJ  Gre. A,,q/,,. U 0 PrintContrabtorsloiftcer's Name and Title  
Project  


G. With respectto work performed in connection with Section 3 covered Indian housing assistance, section 7(b) of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 450e) also applies to the work to be performed under this contract. Section 7(b) requires that tothe greatest extent feasible (i) preference and opportunities for training and employment shall be given to Indians, and (ii) preference in the award of contracts and subcontracts shall be given to Indian organizations and Indian-owned Economic Enterprises. Partiesto this contract that are subject to the provisions of Section 3 and section 7(b) agree to comply with Section 3 tothe maximum extent feasible, but not in 
derogmt;coi;ooe wtth section 7(b). 
Note: The person signing must be authorized by owner, developer or contractor to carry out the Contractor's Section 3 Area Economic Opportunity Plan. 
CALIFORNIA ALL-PURPOSE ACKNOWLEDGMENT CIVIL CODE § 1189 
,,J
A notary public or other officer completing this certificate verifies only the identity of the individual who signed the document to which this certificate is attached, and not the truthfulness, accuracy, or validity of that document. 
State of California ::' L
County of , 2dn .l. 
On .lap) 2019 before me, ---------'----'fL..I....LJl--4-'--i...,.,:.
--'-.--'-''-"!-""-.c..i.-+__,__-""<...J.{e­
...:::.+ 
/ 1Date Here I ert Name and Tit/. of the Officer 
tJ.... ---=..,-;.--:-,__________e______personally appeared ______,,.ti€=;tt,----.f½ele<;,,, _____ _
.J Name(s) of Signer(s) 
who proved to me on the basis of satisfactory evidence to be the person(s) whose name(s) is/are subscribed to the within instrument and acknowledged to me that he/she/they executed the same in his/her/their authorized capacity(ies), and that by his/her/their signature(s) on the instrument the person(s), or the entity upon behalf of which the person(s) acted, executed the instrument. 
I certify under PENAL TY OF PERJURY under the laws of the State of California that the foregoing paragraph is true and correct. 

Place Notary Seal Above 
---------------OPTTONAL--------------­
Though this section is optional, completing this information can deter alteration of the document or fraudulent reattachment of this form to an unintended document. 
Description of Attached Document 
Title or Type of Document: Ats Conth:4G. Document Date: ________ 
Number of Pages: ___ Signer(s) Other Than Named Above: _____________ 
Capacity(ies) Claimed by Signer(s) 
Signer's Name: ___________ _ Signer's Name: ____________ 
. 
Corporate Officer -Title(s): _______ .Corporate Officer -Title(s): _______ 

. 
Partner -. Limited . General . Partner -. Limited . General 

. 
Individual . Attorney in Fact . Individual .Attorney in Fact

. 
Trustee . Guardian or Conservator . Trustee .Guardian or Conservator 

. 
Other: ___________e_e__ . Other: _e____________ _ 


Signer Is Representing: _________ Signer Is Representing: _________ 
©2014 National Notary Association• www.NationalNotary.org • 1-800-US NOTARY (1-800-876-6827) Item #5907 
Request for Taxpayer 
Give Form to the 
W-9
Form 
Identification Number and Certification requester. Do not 
(Rev. November 2017) 
send to the IRS.
Department of the Treasury 
. Go to www.irs.gov/FormW9 for instructions and the latest information.
Internal Revenue Service 
1 Name (as shown on your income tax return}. Name is required on this line; do not leave this line blank. 
Interfaith Communitv Services, Inc 
2 Business name/disregarded entity name, if different from above 
Ql 
ro 
0.. 
C 
0 
• (I)
Ql C: 
.C...0 
0 
o2 
.1;,C
•­
..,__ 
ll. 0 
0 
1/) 
Ql 
7 List account number(s) here (optionaO 
•• Taxpayer Identification Number {TIN) 
4 Exemptions (codes apply only to following seven boxes. 
,.j 3 Check appropriate box for federal tax classification of the person whose name is entered on line 1. Check only one of the 
certain entities, not individuals; see instructions on page 3): D lndividuaVsole proprietor or 0 C Corporation 0 S Corporation 0 Partnership 0 Trust/estate single-member LLC 
Exempt payee code [rt any) 
D Limited liability company. Enter the tax classification (C=C corporation, S=S corporation, P=Partnership) . Note: Check the appropriate box in the line above for the tax classification of the single-member owner. Do not check 
Exemption from FATCA reporting LLC if the LLC is classified as a single-member LLC that is disregarded from the owner unless the owner of the LLC is 
code (if any) 
another LLC that is not disregarded from the owner for U.S. federal tax purposes. Otheiwise, a single-member LLC that is disregarded from the owner should check the appropriate box for the tax classification of its owner. 
D Other (see instructions) . 
(Applies ro accounts maintained outside the U.S.) 
Requester's name and address (optionaQ 5 Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.) See instructions. 
550 W Washinaton Ave 
6 City, state, and ZIP code 
Escondido, CA 92025 
Enter you'. TIN inethe app_ro.ri_ate box. !h. TIN provided mustematch t.e name given on line 1 to avoid backup withholding. For ind1v1duals, this Is generally your social security number (SSN). However, for a resident alien, sole proprietor, or disregarded entity, see the instructions forPart I, later. For other entities, it is your employer identification number (EIN). If you do not have a number, see How to get a TIN, later. 
Note: If the account is in more than one name, see the instructions for line 1. Also see What Name and Number To Give the Requester for guidelines on whose number to enter. 
I Social security number [II] -DJ -I or I Employer identification number  I  I  I  I I  
95  -3  837 7  14  

Certification 
Under penalties of perjury, I certify that: 
1. 
The number shown on this form is my correct taxpayer identification number (or I am waiting for a number to be issued to me); and 

2. 
I am not subject to backup withholding because: (a) I am exempt from backup withholding, or (b) I have not been notified by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) that I am subject to backup withholding as a result of a failure to report all interest or dividends, or (c) the IRS has notified me that I am no longer subject to backup withholding; and 

3. 
I am a U.S. citizen or other U.S. person (defined below); and 

4. 
The FATCA code(s} entered on this form (if any) indicating that I am exempt from FATCA reporting is correct. 


Certification instructions. You must cross out item 2 above if you have been notified by the IRS that you are currently subject to backup withholding because you have failed to report all interest and dividends on your tax return. For real estate transactions, item 2 does not apply. For mortgage interest paid, acquisition or abandonment of secured property, cancellation of debt, contributions to an individual retirement arrangement (IRA), and generally, payments other than interest and dividends, you are not required to sign the certification, but you must provide your correct TIN. See the instructions for Part 11, later. 
Sign Signature of Here U.S. person . 
General lnstruc 
Section references are to the Internal Revenue Code unless otherwise 
noted. 
Future developments. For the latest information about developments related to Form W-9 and its instructions, such as legislation enacted after they were published, go to www.irs.gov/FormW9. 
Purpose of Form 
An individual or entity (Form W-9 requester) who is required to file an information return with the IRS must obtain your correct taxpayer identification number (TIN) which may be your social security number (SSN), individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN), adoption taxpayer identification number (ATIN), or employer identification number (EIN}, to report on an information return the amount paid to you, or other amount reportable on an information return. Examples of information returns include, but are not limited to, the following. 
• Form 1099-INT (interest earned or paid} 
Date . 
• 
Form 1099-DIV (dividends, including those from stocks or mutual funds) 

• 
Form 1099-MISC (various types of income, prizes, awards, or gross proceeds) 

• 
Form 1099-8 (stock or mutual fund sales and certain other transactions by brokers) 

• 
Form 1099-S (proceeds from real estate transactions) 

• 
Form 1099-K (merchant card and third party network transactions) 

• 
Form 1098 (home mortgage interest), 1098-E (student loan interest), 1098-T (tuition) 

• 
Form 1099-C (canceled debt) 

• 
Form 1099-A (acquisition or abandonment of secured property) 


Use Form W-9 only if you are a U.S. person (including a resident alien), to provide your correct TIN. 
Ifyou do not return Form W-9 to the requester with a TIN, you might be subject to backup withholding. See What is backup withholding, later. 
Cat. No. 10231X Form W-9 (Rev. 11-2017) 
INTER-6 OP ID: MT 
ACORD" DATE(MM/00/YYYY) 
CERTIFICATE OF LIABILITY INSURANCE 
. I 07/26/2018 
THIS CERTIFICATE IS ISSUED AS A MATTER OF INFORMATION ONLY AND CONFERS NO RIGHTS UPON THE CERTIFICATE HOLDER. THIS 
CERTIFICATE DOES NOT AFFIRMATIVELY OR NEGATIVELY AMEND, EXTEND OR ALTER THE COVERAGE AFFORDED BY THE POLICIES 
BELOW. THIS CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE DOES NOT CONSTITUTE A CONTRACT BETWEEN THE ISSUING INSURER(S), AUTHORIZED 
REPRESENTATIVE OR PRODUCER, AND THE CERTIFICATE HOLDER. 
IMPORTANT: If the certificate holder is an ADDITIONAL INSURED, the policy(ies) must be endorsed. If SUBROGATION IS WAIVED, subject to 
the tenns and conditions of the policy, certain policies may require an endorsement. A statement on this certificate does not confer rights to the 
certificate holder in lieu of such endorsement(s). 
PRODUCER cT
..i.RHouse Account 
North County Insurance 
N
E..'1.£>RJ,_ Extl• 760-745-9511 Ir. Nol: 760-745-9157 
P. 0. Box 907 
Escondido, CA 92033-0907 
House Account 
E-MAIL 

550 W. Washington Ave. STE B 
Escondido, CA 92025-1629 
INSURER D: 
INSURER E: 
INSURERRF: 
COVERAGES CERTIFICATE NUMBER· REVISION NUMBER· 

THIS IS TO CERTIFY THAT THE POLICIES OF INSURANCE LISTED BELOW HAVE BEEN ISSUED TO THE INSURED NAMED ABOVE FOR THE POLICY PERIOD 
INDICATED. NOTWITHSTANDING ANY REQUIREMENT, TERM OR CONDITION OF ANY CONTRACT OR OTHER DOCUMENT WITH RESPECT TO WHICH THIS 
CERTIFICATE MAY BE ISSUED OR MAY PERTAIN, THE INSURANCE AFFORDED BY THE POLICIES DESCRIBED HEREIN IS SUBJECT TO ALL THE TERMS, 
EXCLUSIONS AND CONDITIONS OF SUCH POLICIES. LIMITS SHOWN MAY HAVE BEEN REDUCED BY PAID CLAIMS. 
DESCRIPTION OF OPERATIONS /LOCATIONS/ VEHICLES (ACORD 101, Additional Remarks Schedule, may be attached if more space is required) 
Ci.of Escondido, its officials, em ploCees and volunteers are named as 
ad itional Insured per attached form G 2010 
CERTIFICATE HOLDER CANCELLATION 
CITYOFE 
SHOULD ANY OF THE ABOVE DESCRIBED POLICIES BE CANCELLED BEFORE 
THE EXPIRATION DATE THEREOF, NOTICE WILL BE DELIVERED IN
City of Escondido ACCORDANCE WITH THE POLICY PROVISIONS. Community Services Dept. 
201 N Broadway 
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE 
Escondido, CA 92025 
/ fl§.G·.vY'·-.Jtl...e,\x¥:/J
I 
© 1988-2014 ACORD CORPORATION. All rights reserved. 
ACORD 25 (2014101) The ACORD name and logo are registered marks of ACORD 
INTER-6 OP ID: MT ACORD' 0A TE (M M/DDIYYYY)
CERTIFICATE OF LIABILITY INSURANCE 
. 08/21/2019 THIS CERTIFICATE IS ISSUED AS A MATTER OF INFORMATION ONLY ANO CONFERS NO RIGHTS UPON THE CERTIFICATE HOLDER. THIS CERTIFICATE DOES NOT AFFIRMATIVELY OR NEGATIVELY AMEND, EXTEND OR ALTER THE COVERAGE AFFORDED BY THE POLICIES 
I 
BELOW. THIS CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE DOES NOT CONSTITUTE A CONTRACT BETWEEN THE ISSUING INSURER(S), AUTHORIZED 
REPRESENTATIVE OR PRODUCER, ANO THE CERTIFICATE HOLDER. IMPORTANT: If the certificate holder Is an ADDITIONAL INSURED, the policy(les) must be endorsed, If SUBROGATION IS WAIVED, subject to the terms and conditions of the policy, certain policies may require an endorsement A statement on this certificate does not confer rights to the certificate holder In Heu of such endorsement(s}. 
PRODUCER .2:..cT House Account 
North County Insurance lio eEExO:760-745-9511 Nol: 760-745-9157 
P.O. Box 907 rE..E, I r.e. 
Escondido, CA 92033-0907 I S:House Account 
INSURJ:R!Sl AFFORDING COVERAGE NAIC# INSURER A: Philadelphia Indemnity Ins. Co 18058 INSURED Interfaith Community Services, INSURER s, Beazley Insurance Inc. 
INSURERC: 
550 W. Washington Ave. STE B INSURER D: 
Escondido, CA 92025-1629 INSURER E: INSURERF: 
COVERAGES CERTIFICATE NUMBER· REVISION NUMBER· 
THIS IS TO CERTIFY THAT THE POLICIES OF INSURANCE LISTED BELOW HAVE BEEN ISSUED TO THE INSURED NAMED ABOVE FOR THE POLICY PERIOD INDICATED. NOTWITHSTANDING ANY REQUIREMENT, TERM OR CONDITION OF ANY CONTRACT OR OTHER DOCUMENT WITH RESPECT TO WHICH THIS CERTIFICATE MAY BE ISSUED OR MAY PERTAIN, THE INSURANCE AFFORDED BY THE POLICIES DESCRIBED HEREIN IS SUBJECT TO ALL THE TERMS, EXCLUSIONS AND CONDITIONS OF SUCH POLICIES. LIMITS SHOWN MAY HAVE BEEN REDUCED BY PAID CLAIMS. 

City of Escondido Community Services Dept. 201 N Broadway Escondido, CA 92025 
I 
SHOULD ANY OF THE ABOVE DESCRIBED POLICIES BE CANCELLED BEFORE THE EXPIRATION DATE THEREOF, NOTICE WILL BE DELIVERED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE POLICY PROVISIONS. 
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE 
.Ov . 
no 1n. 11u 
NORTH04
__........,
ACORD" DATE (MMIDDIYYYY) 
CERTIFICATE OF LIABILITY INSURANCE 
06/28/2019 
THIS CERTIFICATE IS ISSUED AS A MATTER OF INFORMATION ONLY AND CONFERS NO RIGHTS UPON THE CERTIFICATE HOLDER. THIS CERTIFICATE DOES NOT AFFIRMATIVELY OR NEGATIVELY AMEND, EXTEND OR ALTER THE COVERAGE AFFORDED BY THE POLICIES BELOW. THIS CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE DOES NOT CONSTITUTE A CONTRACT BETWEEN THE ISSUING INSURER(S), AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OR PRODUCER, AND THE CERTIFICATE HOLDER. 
I 
IMPORTANT: If the certificate holder is an ADDITIONAL INSURED, the policy(ies) must have ADDITIONAL INSURED provisions or be endorsed. If SUBROGATION IS WAIVED, subject to the terms and conditions of the policy, certain policies may require an endorsement. A statement on this certificate does not confer riahts to the certificate holder in lieu of such endorsement(s). 
PRODUCER 619-937-01E64 T Sam Brown
22.l.cE
/ r..e.. No):619-937-0168
Rancho Mesa Insurance Services 250 Riverview Parkway #401 Santee, CA 92071 
llil."1tMkss• 
INSURER(Sl AFFORDING COVERAGE NAICE# 

--,,.., :ATF NIIMRi::D• 1 
THIS IS TO CERTIFY THAT THE POLICIES OF INSURANCE LISTED BELOW HAVE BEEN ISSUED TO THE INSURED NAMED ABOVE FOR THE POLICY PERIOD INDICATED. NOTWITHSTANDING ANY REQUIREMENT, TERM OR CONDITION OF ANY CONTRACT OR OTHER DOCUMENT WITH RESPECT TO WHICH THIS CERTIFICATE MAY BE ISSUED OR MAY PERTAIN, THE INSURANCE AFFORDED BY THE POLICIES DESCRIBED HEREIN IS SUBJECT TO ALL THE TERMS, EXCLUSIONS AND CONDITIONS OF SUCH POLICIES. LIMITS SHOWN MAY HAVE BEEN REDUCED BY PAID CLAIMS. 
lN.. 
0 TYPE OF INSURANCE COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY 
. CLAIMS-MADE . OCCUR
'-­'--
N'L AGGREGATE LIMIT APPLIES PER: REPOLICY . .f8-f . LOC 
OTHER: 
.'?.?.!-'.-.\If 
POLICY EXP 
POLICY NUMBER --..L,!CY E.f. .. LIMITS
,m 
EACH OCCURRENCE . 
DAMAGE TO RENTED 
pRi=Ml'>I='> /Ea ........ $ MED EXP (AQl one person) 
$ 
I 
PERSONAL & ADV INJURY $ GENERAL AGGREGATE $ PRODUCTS -COMP/OP AGG $ 
$ 
fE.....!.llNGLE LIMIT AUTOMOBILE LIABILITY 
$
'-­
ANY AUTO 
BODILY INJURY /Per oerson1 OWNED SCHEDULED
AUTOSAUTOS ONLY . 
BODILY INJURY /Per accident I $ Pf.OPERTY11.AMAGE
( er accident $
.--.LRTEWs ONLY ,....... 
.&.cW6.t. 
• 
UMBRELLA LIAB OCCUR
.-i 
.J=l,.G.H OCCURRENCE $
'-­
EXCESS LIAB CLAIMS-MADE 
AGGREGATE $ OED i RETENTION$ 
I 
•
wPER OTH­A WORKERS COMPENSATION 
J
..SIAI!JIE FRAND EMPLOYERS' LIABILITY YIN 
2135124502 07/01/2019 07/01/2020 
1,000,000 
ANY PROPRIETOR/PARTNER/EXECUTIVE . E.L. EACH ACCIDENT $
N/A(Mandatory in NH) 
OFFICER/MEMBER EXCLUDED? 
1,000,000 
E.L. DISEASE -EA EMPLOYEE $ 
1,000,000 
g..}.ftf[.. ..'6PERATIONS below E.L DISEASE -POI 1r.y LIMIT $ 
DESCRIPTION OF OPERATIONS I LOCATIONS I VEHICLES (ACORD 101, Addltlonal Remar1<& Schedule, may be attached If more space la required) 
RE: PROOF OF INSURANCE 
EVIDEN1 
••••EVIDENCE OF COVERAGE****** 
****EVIDENCE OF COVERAGE****** 
****EVIDENCE OF COVERAGE****** 
ACORD 25 (2016/03) SHOULD ANY OF THE ABOVE DESCRIBED POLICIES BE CANCELLED BEFORE THE EXPIRATION DATE THEREOF, NOTICE WILL BE DELIVERED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE POLICY PROVISIONS. 
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE 
© 1988-2015 ACORD CORPORATION. All rights reserved. 

f.<M\ IRS Department of the Treasury 
.ifzl'l/) Intcmal Revenue Service 


P.O. Box 2508, Room 4010 In reply refer to: 4077550286 Cincinnati OH 45201 June 03, 2013 LTR 4168C 0 95-3837714 000000 00 
00032869 BODC: TE 
INTERFAITH COMMUNITY SERVICES INC 
550 W WASHINGTON AVENUE 

ESCONDIDO CA 92025-1643 
682 
Employer Identification Number: 95-3837714 Person to Contact: Vaida SingletonToll Free Telephone Number: l-877-829-5500 
Dear Taxpayer: 
This is in response to your Mar. 08, 2013, request for information regarding your tax-exempt status. 
Our records indicate that you were recognized as exempt under 
section 501Cc)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code in a determination 
letter issued in February 1984. 
Our records also indicate that you are not a private foundation within the meaning of section 509Ca) of the Code because you are described in section(s) 509Ca)Cl) and 170Cb)Cl)CA)Cvi)t. 
Donors may deduct contributions to you as provided in section 170 of 
the Code. Bequests, legacies, devises, transfers, or gifts to you or 
for your use are deductible for Federal estate and gift tax purposes
if they meet the applicable provisions of sections 2055, 2106, and 
2522 of the Code. 
Please refer to our website www.i.s.gov/eo for information regarding 
filing requirements. Specifically, section 6033(j) of the Code 
provides that failure to file an annual information return for three 

consecutive years results in revocation of tax-exempt status as of 
the filing due date of the third return for organizations required 
to file. We will publish a list of organizations whose tax-exempt 
status was revoked under section 6033Cj) of the Code on our website 
beginning in early 2011. 



4077550286 
June 03, 2013 LTR 4168C 0 95-3837714 000000 00 00032870 

INTERFAITH .COMMUNITY SERVICES INC 550 W WASHINGTON AVENUE ESCONDIDO CA 92025-1643 
If you have any questions, please call us at the telephone number shown in the heading of this letter. 
Sincerely yours, 

Cindy Thomas Manager, ED Determinations 




GPEG,•1_"° \,,·\. 
,i,J''' 

llnterbfflU'I J 
community services ..,, 
BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
Updated February 2019 
Chair 
General Membership Chair 
Reverend Meg Decker 
Trinity Episcopal Church in Escondido Escondido Faith Leaders' Council University of Nevada 
Immediate Past Chair 
Silas Harrington 
Community Lutheran Church in Escondido Law Offices of Silas Harrington University of Washington School of Law 
Treasurer 
Finance Committee Chair 
Gene Evenskaas 
Bank of America 
US Treasury's Office of Technical Assistance CEO and Founding Partner of Diablo Capital Funding LLC. 
Core Securities and Global Capital Markets Group Carroll College 
Harvard Business School 
Secretary Development Committee Chair 
Mitchell Dubick, J.D., LL.M. 
Yale University 
Case Western Reserve University Georgetown University 
Chairman of the Board of Trustees of Seacrest Village of San Diego Senior Community Centers Chairman of Second Chance 
National Executive Committee Member of the Anti-Defamation League 
Board Trustee of the San Diego Museum of Man 
Investment Committee Chair 
Lisa Brinig, CFP 
Mariner Wealth Advisors, San Diego University of Kansas 
San Diego State University 
Audit Committee Chair 
Paul Polito 
Polito Eppich Associated LLP, CPAs Loyola Marymount University Palomar College Foundation 
St. Stephen's Catholic Community North County Trade Tech High School New Haven Youth and Family Services John Paul the Great Catholic University 
Governance Committee Chair 
Kate McKone-Sweet, Ph.D. 
HERS Wellesley Institute 
University of Virginia Darden School of Business University of Virginia, Darden Graduate School of Business Administration 
Schlesinger Fund for Global Healthcare Professor of Operations Management at Babson College 
St. Bartholomew's Episcopal Church 
Programs Committee Chair 
Laurie Burt 
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Humanitarian Specialist 
University of Utah 
Past Board member, Charity Visions Board Member, The Moran Eye Institute 
Faith Leaders Council Chair 
The Reverend Kadri Webb 
St. John Missionary Baptist Church University of Maryland Baltimore County Samuel DeWitt Proctor School of Theology at the Virginia Union University 
Quality Assurance & Compliance Chair 
John Byers 
Purdue University Indiana University Kelley School of Business Chief Information Officer of N ordson Corporation 
Member 
Carol J. Brooks 
Rising Star Missionary Baptist Church Kent State University 
San Jose State University Community Healthcare Alliance Committee North County African American Women's Association 
Women's Community Club 
Past Board Member Vista Community Clinic Past Board Member KOCT Community Television 
Member 
Christine Carrick 
Owner /Director, Youngdale Mfg. Corp. 
National University 
San Diego State University University of California Los Angeles Past President, Palomar College Foundation Palomar College President's Associates Past Board Member, San Marcos 
Boys and Girls Club 
Palomar College Presidents Associates 
Member 
Zeynep Ilgaz 
Founder, President & CEO, Confirm BioSciences San Diego State University 
National Institutes of Health Commercialization Assistance Program Entrepreneur Society and San Diego State University 
Member 
Stephen Smith 
Partner, Lewis Brisbois Bisgaard & Smith University of San Diego School of Law University of San Diego 
Adjunct Professor of Law at Thomas Jefferson School of Law 
Member 
Diana VanDuzer 
Village Community Presbyterian USA Church Northwest Assistance Ministries 
in'i:erfaith Community Services Board of Directors ­

RESOLUTION OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF 
INTERFAITH COMMUNITY SERVICES, INC. 
Authorized Signatory for Contracts & Financial Instruments 
The Board of Directors of Interfaith Community Services Inc., at the monthly Board of Directors meeting held on November 28, 2018, hereby resolves to authorize Greg Anglea, Chief Executive Officer to sign grant and contract proposals, execute contracts, amendments to contracts, adjustment requests, sign checks and manage financial accounts on behalf of Interfaith Community Services Inc. Signed copies of any resolutions shall be included in the next regularly scheduled board package. 
.4 fl ,/3?;1 ),i:P
..Decker 
DateChair, Board of Directors 
II/3c)/ I Y 
; 
Date


Greg Anglea Date
Chief Executive Officer 
Interfaith Community Services 
550 West Washington Avenue, Escondido, CA 92025 • (760) 489-6380 • .www.interfaithservices.nr. 
BUSINESS LICENSE CITY OF ESCONDIDO 
The business named below is granted this license pursuant to the prov1s1ons of the Escondido Municipal Code to engage in, carry on, or conduct the business, trade, calling or occupation described below. Issuance of this license 1s not an assurance the proposed use conforms to city zoning or ether regulations and shall net relieve the licensee of compliance with building, zoning, fire, or other ordinances cf the City or the State cf Califcrn1a, nor shall issuance be deemed a waiver cf past er future violations cf such laws, nor constitute a barner to pursuit of appropnate legal action against the license holder for such violations. License holder shall renew the license before the expiration date. 
Description: 624-Social Assistance Interfaith Community Services 
Business Name: Business Location: 550 W Washington Ave Escondido, CA 92025 
Business Owner: Greg Anglea Business License Number: 149069 Effective Date: May 30, 2019 
Expiration Date: May 31, 2020
Interfaith Community Services 
550 W Washington Ave 
City of Escondido Com:n.no/ Development Department 
Escondido, CA 92025 
By: 
Bil& MarM 
Bill Martin, Director of Community Development 
BE POS"fEO IN A CONSPICUOUS PLACE NOT TRANSFERABLE 
INTERFAJTH COMMUNITY SERVICES, INC. 
AMENDED AND RESTATED BYLAWS 
Approved at the Meeting of Members May 20, 2015 

Article I NAME AND LOCATION 
Section l Name. The name of the corporation shall be "Interfaith Community Services, Inc." (hereinafter referred to as "Interfaith"). 
Section 2 Principal Office. The principal administrative office for the transaction of the business of Interfaith shall be located at 550 West Washington Avenue, Escondido, CA 92025. The location of the principal administrative office may be changed from time to time by the Board of Directors. 
Section 3 Registered Agent. The Registered Agent of fnterfaith shall be such person as is designated from time to time by the Board of Directors. 
A1iicle H 
PURPOSES 
Section 1 General Purpose. Interfaith is a nonprofit public benefit corporation and is not organized for the private gain of any person. Interfaith is organized and shall exist exclusively for charitable and educational purposes within the meaning of Section 50 l ( c )(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
Section 2 Specific Purpose. The specific purpose of Interfaith Community Services shall be to promote mutual understanding and respect among members and affiliated faith communities, to respond to human needs affecting faith centers, their members, and the community at large, and to operate programs for basic needs, addiction recovery, social services, emergency shelter, housing, veterans, families, youth, seniors, and the unemployed, and for related purposes. 
Section 3 Limitations. Interfaith is a nonprofit, nonracial, nonpolitical organization. The property of Interfaith is irrevocably dedicated to charitable purposes; and no part of the net earnings, contributions, or assets of the corporation shall inure to the benefit of, or be distributable to its Directors, Officers, or other piivate persons. The foregoing shall not preclude Interfaith from paying reasonable compensation for services rendered or from making payments and distributions in furtherance of the purposes set forth in the Articles of Incorporation and otherwise in these Bylaws. No substantial part of the activities of Interfaith shall consist of carrying on propaganda, or otherwise attempting to influence legislation. Interfaith shall not participate or intervene in any political campaign (including the publication or distribution of statements) on behalf of any candidate for public office. Interfaith is not a church and it is not affiliated with any specific faith. Interfaith seeks to work with organizations of many faiths, and with non-religious organizations. Interfaith serves persons of all faiths and non­religious persons and seeks to empower people to lead a productive, self-sufficient lifestyle. 
2 
Article III MEMBERS 
Section l General Members. There shall be a General Membership class (General Members) 
composed of individual congregations and ministerial associations. General Members shall each have 
one vote on all matters presented to the membership for action. To be admitted as a General Member, 
candidates must submit an application and be admitted by election by a majority of the members of the 
Board of Directors. In addition, to maintain such membership, General Members must have current 
information on file with Interfaith pursuant to the General Membership Guidelines established by the 
Board of Directors. General Members are eligible to attend all membership meetings, including but not 
limited to the annual meeting and special meetings. 
Section 2 Supporting Members. There shall be a supporting category of members composed of groups and individuals that do not qualify for General Membership. This category shall be construed broadly to include other organizations, corporations, and individuals interested in supporting the purposes of Interfaith. Suppotiing Members are eligible to attend all membership meetings, including but not limited to the annual meeting and special meetings. Supporting Members do not have any voting rights. 
Section 3 Annual Meeting. The Annual Meeting of the Membership shall be held on the last Wednesday of the month of September each year or at such other time as the Board of Directors may establish. The purpose of the Annual Meeting shall be to receive annual reports of the operations and financial condition of Interfaith, to install Directors, to vote on proposed changes, if any, to the Bylaws and/or Articles of Incorporation, and to transact any other business that may properly come before the meeting. Not less than ten ( 10) days' written notice shall be given of the Annual Meeting of Interfaith. Such notice shall include the date, time and place of such meeting, and a statement of the general nature of all matters to be acted upon. 
Section 4 Special Meetings. Special membership meetings of Interfaith may be called by the Board of Directors, the Chair, the Executive Director, or five percent or more of the members. Notice of any special meeting shall be sent by first-class mail not less than ten (I 0) days in advance of the date for which it is called, and no business may be transacted except matters the general nature of which is set forth in the notice of the meeting. 
Section 5 Quorum. A quorum for the transaction of business at a membership meeting of Interfaith shall consist of twelve Members. Members may vote by proxy. Any and all references in these bylaws to a vote of the membership shall refer to a vote of the General Members. 
Section 6 Voting Rights. General Members shall have the right to vote, as set forth in these bylaws, on the election of directors, on the disposition of all or substantially all of the corporation's assets, on any merger and its principal terms and any amendment of those terms, and on any election to dissolve the corporation. In addition, the General Members shall have the rights afforded members under the California Nonprofit Public Benefit Corporation Law. Except as otherwise specifically provided in these bylaws or the Articles ofincorporation and except as otherwise required by law, each vote taken or made by a majority of the General Members present at a duly held membership meeting at which a quorum is present shall constitute the act of the membership. 

Section 7 Dues, Fees and Assessments. Each General Member and Supporting Member may be requested to pay, within the time and on the conditions set by the Board of Directors, dues, fees, and assessments in amounts to be fixed from time to time by the board. The dues, fees, and assessments shall be equal for all members of each class, but the board may, in its discretion, set different dues, fees, and assessments for each class. 
Section 8 Termination. A membership shall tcnninate on occurrence of any of the following events: 
8. l Resignation of the member; 
8.2 Expiration of the period of membership, unless the membership is renewed on the renewal te1ms fixed by the board; 
8.3 The member's failure to pay dues, fees, or assessments as set by the board within Sixty (60) days after they are due and payable; 
8.4 Termination of membership under Article III, Section 10 of these bylaws based on the good faith determination by the board, or a committee or person authorized by the board to make such a determination, that the member has failed in a material and serious degree to observe the rules of conduct of the corporation, or has engaged in conduct materially and seriously prejudicial to the corporation's purposes and interests. 

Section 9 Suspension of Membership. A member may be suspended, under Article III, Section l O of these bylaws, based on the good faith dete1mination by the board, or a committee or person authorized by the board to make such a detennination, that the member has failed in a material and serious degree to observe the corporation's rules of conduct, or has engaged in conduct materially and seriously prejudicial to the corporation's purposes and interests. 

A person whose membership is suspended shall not be a member during the period of suspension. 
Section 10 Procedure for Suspension and Termination. If grounds appear to exist for suspending or tenninating a member under Article III, Sections 8 or 9 of these bylaws, the following procedure shall be followed: 
10.1 The board shall give the member at least ! 5 days' prior notice of the proposed suspension or tennination and the reasons for the proposed suspension or termination. Notice shall be given by any method reasonably calculated to provide actual notice. Notice given by mail shall be sent by first-class or registered mail to the member's last address as shown on the corporation's records. 
10.2 The member shall be given an opportunity to be heard, either orally or in wntmg, 
at least five days before the effective date of the proposed suspension or termination. The hearing shall be held, or the written statement considered, by the board or by a committee or person authorized by the board to determine whether the suspension or termination should occur. 
10.3 The board, committee, or person shall decide whether the member should be suspended, expelled, or sanctioned in any way. 

l 0.4 ff the member being tenninated contests the findings of the committee, such member has the right to appeal the decision to the entire Board of Directors. Within fifteen (15) days of the decision by the committee, the member shall give notice of appeal to the Chair of the Board, who shall call a special meeting of the Board within fifteen (15) days of said notice. At such special meeting, the Board members shall consider the member's appeal. The decision of the Board of Directors shall be final. 
l 0.5 Any action challenging an expulsion, suspension, or termination of membership, including a claim alleging defective notice, must be commenced within one year after the date of the expulsion, suspension, or tem1ination. 
Article IV 
BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
Section l Number. Except as reserved to the General Members, the affairs of Interfaith shall be directed by its Board of Directors. The board shall consist of not less than fifteen (l 5) and not more than twenty-five (25) directors. Directors, unless sooner removed by resignation, removal, or otherwise, shall serve for a term of three (3) years or until his or her successor is duly elected and qualified. Elections shall be conducted to reasonably stagger the terms of the directors. The Members shall elect board members of Interfaith in accordance with the provisions of these Bylaws. 
Section 2 Election. At the June General Members meeting, directors shall be elected by the General Members from among nominees presented by the Board of Directors. Nominations may be made from the floor, and Members may suggest individuals as nominees to the Board Chair or the Executive Director who shall forward any such suggestions for consideration by the Governance Committee in advance of the June General Membership meeting. Directors elected at the June General Members meeting shall be installed at the next annual Members meeting. 

Section 3 Staggered Board. The board shall be divided into three groups, so that staggered terms may be achieved for the orderly conduct of board member recruitment, appointment and retention. The board appointments shall be staggered so that approximately one-third of the board positions will be voted upon annually. 
Section 4 Vacancies. Any vacancies on the Board of Directors occurring between annual meetings, excluding vacancies caused by removal of a director by the membership, may be filled by a vote of a majority of the remaining directors then in office. The directors shall consider the list of nominees submitted by the Governance Committee. Vacancies caused by removal of a director by the membership shall be filled by a vote of the membership. 

Section 5 Officer Attendance. The Executive Director of Interfaith (as defined herein) may attend board meetings and board committee meetings, unless otherwise instructed by the Board. In no event shall the Executive Director attend Governance Committee meetings related to the evaluation of Executive Director perfonnance or determination of Executive Director compensation. 
Section 6 Diversity. When nominating or electing directors, the Members and directors as appropriate shall strive to reflect the diversity of the community to the greatest extent possible. 


Section 7 Employees. No employee (or member of the immediate family of an employee) of lnterfaith or any entity owned or controlled by Interfaith shall be elected as a director. 
Section 8 Consecutive Tern1s. Board members shall not be limited to a set number of consecutive tenns. 
Section 9 Removal. Any director may be removed by a majority of the Members present at a Generally Membership Meeting, or a special Membership meeting expressly called for such purpose at which a quorum is present. 
Section 10 Removal by Board. A director who: 
10.1 is absent at more than one-third of all regular meetings of the Board of Directors during any 12 month period; 
I 0.2 has been declared of unsound mind by a final order of court; 
10.3 is convicted of a felony; or 
l 0.4 has been found by a final order or judgment of any court to have breached any duty under Title 1, Division 2, Part 2, Chapter 2, Article 3 of the California Corporations Code 
may be removed from office by the Board of Directors. The Governance Committee will monitor board member attendance and make recommendations to the Chair and full board for any such removal. The General Members may remove directors in accordance with the provisions of Section 5222 of the California Corporations Code. 
Section 11 Agreement. By becoming a director of Interfaith, each director agrees to be contractually bound by these corporate bylaws generally, and specifically agrees as follows: 
11n.1 To conduct activities involving Interfaith privately and to maintain all information concerning Interfaith and its affairs in confidence and in a manner consistent with the decisions and actions reached by the Board of Directors and its committees, the policies and procedures of Interfaith, these corporate bylaws and Interfaith' s Articles of Incorporation; 
11.2 The Executive Director and Chair of the Board of Directors of Interfaith shall be the spokespersons of Interfaith unless another person has been delegated this responsibility by either of them, or by action of the Board of Directors. Individual directors shall not comment outside of duly called meetings of the Board of Directors or meetings of any of its committees on activities of Interfaith. This prohibition on public statements shall not be construed as limiting any director's ability to discuss any matter with other directors or the Executive Director of Interfaith. 
Section 12 Standard of Conduct. Pursuant to Section 5231 of the California Nonprofit Public Benefit Corporation Law, a Director shall perform the duties of a Director, including duties as a Member of any Committee of the Board upon which the Director may serve, in good faith, in a manner such Director believes to be in the best interests of [nterfaith and with such care, including reasonable inquiry, as an ordinary prudent person in a like position would use under similar circumstances. rn 
6 
performing the duties of a Director, a Director shall be entitled to rely on information, opinions, reports or statements including financial statements and other financial data, in each case prepared or presented by: 
12.1 One or more Officers or employees of Interfaith whom the Director believes to be reliable and competent in the matters presented; 
12.2 Counsel, independent accountants, or other persons as to matters which the Director believes to be within such person's professional or expert competence; or 
12.3 A Committee of the Board upon which the Director does not serve, as to matters within its desi6>nated authority, which Committee the Director believes to merit confidence. 
Section 13 Self-Dealing Transactions. Pursuant to Section 5233 and except as provided in Section 5233 of the Nonprofit Public Benefit Corporation Law of the State of California, the Corporation shall not be a party to a transaction in which one or more of its directors has a matetial financial interest ("Interested Director") unless: 
I3 .1 Approval by Attorney General. The Attorney General, or the couri in an action in which the Attorney General is an indispensable party, has approved the transaction before or after it was consummated; or 
13.2 Ptior Approval by Board. The following facts are established: 
13.2.n1 fnterfaith entered into the transaction for its own benefit; 
13.2 .2 The transaction was fair and reasonable as to Interfaith at the time Interfaith entered into the transaction; 
13 .2.3 Prior to consummating the transaction or any part thereof the Board authorized or approved the transaction in good faith by a vote of a majority of the Directors then in office without counting the vote of the Interested Director or Directors, and with the knowledge of the matetial facts concerning the transaction and the Director's interest in the transaction; or 
13.3 Preliminary Approval by Authorized Committee or Person and Subsequent Approval by the Board. The following facts are established: 
13.3. l A committee or person authorized by the Board approved the transaction in a manner consistent with the standards set forth in Section 13.2 above; 
13.3 .2 It was not reasonably practical to obtain the approval of the Board p1ior to entering into the transaction; and 
13.3.3 The Board, after determining in good faith that the conditions of subsections 
13.3.l and 13.3.2 were satisfied, ratified the transaction at the Board's next meeting by a vote of a majority of the Directors then in office without counting the vote of the Interested Director or Directors. 
7 



[n light of the foregoing limitations, all directors shall fill out an arnmal questionnaire dealing with this subject matter and acknowledging that they have read and understand the organization's conflict of interest policy, as adopted by the Board of Directors and amended from time to time. 
Section 14 Interested Persons. Pursuant to Section 5227 of the Nonprofit Public Benefit Corporation Law of the State of California, no more than forty-nine percent (49%) of the Directors serving on the Board may be "Interested Persons." For the purposes of this section, "Interested Persons" means either 
(i) any person cuirently being compensated by Interfaith for services rendered to it within the previous twelve (12) months whether as a full-time or part-time employee, independent contractor, or otherwise, excluding any reasonable compensation paid to a Director as Director; or (ii) any brother, sister, ancestor, descendant, spouse, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, mother-in-law or father-in-law of any such person. The provisions of this Section shall not affect the validity or enforceability of any transaction entered into by Interfaith. 
Section 15 Powers. The administrative powers of Interfaith shall be vested in the Board of Directors, which shall have charge, control, and management of the property, affairs, and funds of Interfaith; shall fill vacancies among officers for unexpired terms; shall have the power and authority to do and perform all acts and functions not inconsistent with these bylaws or with any action taken by Interfaith. 
Article V 
REGULAR AND SPECIAL MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF D[RECTORS 
Section I General. Meetings of the Board of Directors shall be held at the principal office of interfaith or at such other place or places as designated by resolution of the Board of Directors or in the notice of the meeting. 
Section 2 Annual Meeting. The annual organizational meeting of the Board of Directors shall be held immediately after the annual meeting of the Members. The annual organizational meeting shall be held for the purpose of electing Directors, organizing the Board, electing Officers, and transacting such business as may come before the meeting. Pending such organizational meeting, all Ofilcers of the Corporation shall continue to hold their respective positions as Officers of the Corporation. 
Section 3 Regular Meetings. Regular meetings of the Board of Directors shall be held on such other periodic basis as may be specified and noticed by the Board of Directors. The Board of Directors shall meet at ieast six times a year. 
Section 4 Special Meetings. Special meetings of the Board of Directors may be called either (i) by the Chair of the Board or (ii) by the Secretary upon the Secretary's receipt of a written request signed by not less than one-third (1/3) of the members of the Board of Directors then in office. Notice of the time and place of any special meeting of the Board of Directors shall be given to each Director not less than forty-eight (48) hours before the date of the meeting if given personally or by telephone (including a voice messaging system or other system or technology designed to record and communicate messages) or electronic mail and not less than four (4) days before the date of the meeting if given by first-class mail. The notice shall also state the general nature of the business for which the special meeting has been called, and no business other than that stated in the notice shall be transacted at such special meeting. 


Section 5 Consent to Meetings. The transactions of the Board of Directors at any meeting however called and noticed or wherever held, shall be as valid as though done at a meeting duly held after call and notice if a quorum be present and if either before or after the meeting each Director not present signs a written waiver of notice, or a consent to the holding of such meeting or approval of the minutes thereot or who attends the meeting without protesting, prior thereto or at its commencement, the lack of notice to such Director. All such waivers, consents or approvals shall be filed with the corporate records and made a part of the minutes of the meeting. 
Section 6 Quorum. A majority of the authorized number of Directors shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, except to adjourn. In the case where, by resolution, the authorized number of Directors is established, a majority of the number of Directors authorized by resolution shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, except to adjourn. In the case where, owing to death, incapacity, or resignation, the number of Directors then serving is less than a majority of the authorized number of Directors, then the majority of the Directors then serving shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, except to adjourn. 
6.1 Actions Taken. Every action taken or decision made by a majority of the Directors present at a meeting duly held at which a quorum is present shall be the act of the Board of Directors, subject to the more stringent provisions of the California Nonprofit Public Benefit Corporation Law, including, without limitation, those provisions related to (a) approval of contracts or transactions in which a Director has a direct or indirect material financial interest, (b) approval of certain transactions between corporations having common Directorships, (c) creation of and appointments to Committees of the board, and (d) indemnification of Directors. A meeting at which a quorum is initially present may continue to transact business, despite the withdrawal of Directors, if any action taken or decision made is approved by at least a majority of the required quorum for that meeting. Members of the Board of Directors may not vote by proxy. 
Section 7 Adjournment. A majority of the Directors present, whether or not a quorum is present, may adjourn any Directors' meeting to meet again at another time or place. In the event a meeting of the Board of Directors is adjourned for more than twenty-four (24) hours, notice of any adjournment to another time or place shall be given prior to the time of the adjourned meeting to the Directors who were not present at the time of the adjournment. 
Section 8 Action Without Meeting. Any action required or permitted to be taken by the Board of Directors under any provision of the Nonprofit Public Benefit Corporation Law of the State of California may be taken without a meeting if all Members of the Board shall individually or collectively consent in writing to such action. Such written consent or consents shall be filed with the minutes of the proceedings of the Board. Such action by written consent shall have the same force and effect as a unanimous vote of such Directors. Any certificate or other document filed under any provision of the Nonprofit Public Benefit Corporation Law of the State of California which relates to action so taken shall state that the action was taken by unanimous written consent of the Board of Directors without a meeting, and that the Bylaws authorize the Directors to so act. For the purposes of this section only, "all Members of the Board" shall not include any "Interested Directors" as defined in Article IV, Section 13 above. 


Section 9 Telephonic and Electronic Communication Meetings. Members of the Board mayparticipate in a meeting through use of conference telephone, electronic video screen communication, or other communications equipment. Pmiicipation in a meeting pursuant to this Section constitutes presence in person at that meeting if all of the following apply: 
9.n1 Each member participating in the meeting can communicate with all of the other members concun-ent!y; 
9.2 Each member is provided the means of pariicipating in all matters before the board, including the capacity to propose, or to interpose an objection to, a specific action to be taken by the corporation; and; 
9.3 The Board adopts and implements some means of verifying both of the following: 
9.3.1 A person communicating by telephone, electronic video screen, or other communications equipment is a Director entitled to pmiicipate in the board meeting; and 
9.3.2 All statements, questions, actions, or votes were made by that Director and not by another person not permitted to participate as a Director. 
Section 10 Nonliabilitv of Directors and Certain Officers. 
I0.1 Volunteer Directors. Pursuant to Section 5239 of the Nonprofit Public Benefit Corporation Law of the State of California, there shall be no personal liability to a third party on the part of a volunteer Director or volunteer Officer of Interfaith caused by the Director's or Officer's negligent act or omission in the performance of that person's duties as volunteer Director or Officer, if all the following conditions are met: 
l O .1.1 The act or omission was within the scope of the Director's or Officer's duties; 
l 0.1.2 The act or omission was performed in good faith; 
I0.1.3 The act or omission was not reckless, wanton, intentional, or grossly negligent; 
10.1.4 Interfaith has complied with the requirements of section 10.2 below. 

Ii) 

This limitation on the personal liability of a volunteer Director or Officer does not limit the liability of Interfaith for any damages caused by acts or omissions of a volunteer Director or volunteer Officer, nor does it eliminate the liability of a Director or Officer provided in Section 523 3 or 523 7 of the Nonprofit Public Benefit Corporation Law of the State of California in any action or proceeding brought by the Attorney General. 
l0.2 Requirement to Obtain Liability Insurance. In order to obtain the full benefit of the limitation of liability set forth in Section 10 above, the Corporation and the Directors shall make all reasonable efforts in good faith to obtain liability insurance in the form of a general liability policy for the corporation and a Director's and Officer's liability policy. 
Article VI 
OFFICERS 
Section l Number and Election. The officers of Interfaith shall be a Chair, a Vice Chair, the Executive Director, a Secretary, a Treasurer, and such other officers as the Board of Directors may auth01ize. Board of Directors shall hold an annual organizational meeting for the purpose of electing the officers of Interfaith and present a slate of officers who will be installed at the annual membership meeting of Interfaith, except the Executive Director who shall be appointed and remain in office on such terms and conditions as the Board of Directors may determine in accordance with Section 6 of this Article. Unless sooner removed by resignation, removal, or otherwise, the officers so elected shall hold office for a term of two (2) years or until successors have been duly elected, qualified, and installed at the amrnal meeting. The chair must have at least two (2) years expe1ience serving as a director before being eligible for election as chair. There shall be no limit on the number of consecutive terms that a person may serve as an officer. 
Section 2 Chair of the Board. The Chair of the board shall, when present, preside at all meetings of the Board of Directors and, subject to these Bylaws, shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may from time to time be prescribed by the Board of Directors. 
Section 3 Vice Chair. The Vice-Chair shall act as chair in the absence of the Chair and, when so acting, shall have the power and authority of the Chair. 
Section 4 Secretary. The Secretary shall, as secretary of the Board of Directors, act as custodian of all records and reports of the Board of Directors, and shall be responsible for the keeping and reporiing of adequate records of all meetings of the Board of Directors. The Secretary or the Secretary's delegate shall send appropriate notices, prepare agendas and take and record minutes for all meetings of the Board of Directors. The Secretary shall have such other powers and duties as may be prescribed from time to time by the Board of Directors. 
Section 5 Treasurer. The Treasurer, under the direction of the Board of Directors, shall have supervision of all funds of Interfaith. Acting with the Executive Committee, if established by the Board of Directors, the Treasurer shall ensure that a true and accurate accounting of the financial transactions of Interfaith is made, and that financial reports are presented to the Board of Directors. The Treasurer shall have such other powers and duties as may be prescribed from time to time by the Board of Directors 

ll 
Section 6 Executive Director. The Board of Directors shall have the authoiity to hire an individual to serve as Interfaith's Executive Director. Such individual shall be designated with such titles as may be designated by the board. Such individual shall report to the Board of Directors. The Executive Director of Interfaith shall have general supervisory and management responsibility over the affairs of Interfaith and shall have such other duties and responsibilities as the Board of Directors may assign from time to time. The Executive Director shall report to the Board of Directors at all of its meetings on the affairs and activities of Interfaith and shall have primary responsibility for the proper operation and continued existence of Interfaith. The Executive Director shall also be responsible for the effective administration of Interfaith' s facilities and operations. In the event the position of Executive Director becomes vacant, the Board of Directors shall establish a selection process for the retention of a new Executive Director. 
Article VII 
BOARD COMMITTEES 
Section 1 Executive Committee 
1.1 Composition and Term. There shall be an Executive Committee of the Board which shall consist of the Chair of the Board ( who shall act as Chair of the Executive Committee), the Vice-Chair, Secretary, Treasurer, the fmmediate-Past Chair, and any other directors selected by a majority of the Board of Directors. All members of the Executive Committee must be members of the Board of Directors. If any person holding any of the officer positions mentioned herein are not members of the Board of Directors, such person shall not serve on the Executive Committee. Members of the Executive Committee shall hold office during the term of their respective officer position and until their successor is elected. If a non-officer director is appointed to the Executive Committee, such person shall serve a one-year tenn and be eligible for reappointment in the discretion of the Board. Unless otherwise instructed by the Executive Committee, it shall be the duty of the Executive Director to attend the meetings of the Executive Committee in an advisory capacity. 
1.2 Duties and Powers. The Executive Committee shall meet as needed, shall assume all duties of the Board during the interim between meetings of the Board, and shall have all of the authority of the Board, except with respect to the following: 
1.2.1 The approval of any action for which the Nonprofit Public Benefit Corporation Law of the State of California also requires the approval of Members of a Corporation, in which event the approval of the Board shall be required. 
l .2.2 The filling of vacancies on the Board or in any Committee which has the authority of the Board. 
1.2.3 The fixing of compensation of the Directors for serving on the Board or on any Committee. 
1.2.4 The amendment or repeal of any resolution of the Board which by its express terms is not so amendable or repeatable. 

12 
1.2.5 The appointment of Committees of the Board having the authority of the Board, or the Members thereof. 
1.2.6 The approval of any self-dealing transaction, except as pcrn1itted in California Corporations Code Section 5238. 
1.3. Meetings. 
1.3.1 Regular Meetings.Regular meetings of the Executive Committee, if any, may be held at such times and places as the Chairperson of the Board may announce at any meeting of the Executive Committee. Written notice may also be provided, but shall not be required where notice has been orally provided at an Executive Committee meeting. It is the general intent of the Board of Directors that the Executive Committee will convene only in rare instances when a board decision is necessary and it is impractical to convene the full board. 
1.3.2 Special Meetings. Special meetings of the Executive Committee shall be held when called by the Chainnan of the Board or by any two members of the Executive Committee upon request to the Secretary in writing. Notice of special meetings of the Executive Committee shall be given in the same manner as provided in these bylaws for the giving of notice of special meetings of the Board, except that the required notice period for notice by personal delivery, telephone or facsimile or other electronic means shall be twenty-four (24) hours. 
1.3.3 Provisions Regarding Board Meetings. The prov1s1ons of these Bylaws regarding waiver of notice, participation by telephone and action without a meeting shall also be applicable to meetings of the Executive Committee. 
1.3.4 Quorum. A majority of the members of the Executive Committee shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. A meeting at which a quorum is initially present may continue to transact business notwithstanding the withdrawal of committee members if any action taken is approved by a majority of a quornm. 
1.3.5 Minutes. A copy of the minutes of each meeting of the Executive Committee shall be provided to all of the directors no later than the commencement of the next regular meeting of the Board of Directors. 
Section 2 Advisory Committees 
2.1 General. The Board of Directors may designate such advisory committees as the Board deems necessary, which committees may consist of either members of the Board or other persons designated in the resolution authorizing the committee. The designation of any committee and the delegation to it of any authority shall not relieve the Board of Directors, or any member thereof, of any responsibility imposed by law. The Board of Directors shall appoint the following standing advisory committees: Governance, Finance, Audit, Investment, Development, Faith Leaders Council, and Membership. 
Membership. Membership of advisory committees shall be determined as follows: 
2.2 


13 
2.2.1 Members and chairs of standing and special board committees shall be chosen by the Board of Directors at the annual organizational meeting after the new directors and officers of the Board of Directors are elected. Committee chairs and members may also be voted upon from time to time at any regular or special meeting of the Board of Directors. 
2.2.2 The number of members of each committee shall be as provided below or as may be specified by the Board of Directors from time to time. 
2.2.3 The Board Chair shall nominate and the Board of Directors, by majority vote, shall appoint voting members of all advisory committees as provided in the following sections of this Atiicle. Unless otherwise provided in these bylaws, advisory committees may consist of directors and non-director members. In selecting committee members, the board shall consider such individual's expertise, knowledge and relevant perspective. 
2.2.4 The chair of each committee shall be a director of Interfaith and shall report to the Board of Directors periodically on the activities of the committee. 
2.2.5 A majority of the members of a committee shall constitute a quorum. Each committee shall make available minutes of its meetings to the Board of Directors. Members of a committee may not vote by proxy. Attendance requirements for the committee members shall be the same as for the Board of Directors. 
2.3 Finance Committee. The Finance Committee shall consist of not less than three 
(3) individuals, shall meet at least six times a year, and shall report to the Board regarding the fiscal health and performance of Interfaith. The Finance Committee shall perform such other functions and have such other responsibilities regarding the financial affairs of Interfaith and any entity under Interfaith's direct or indirect control as the board determines. 

2.4 Investment Committee. The Investment Committee shall meet quarterly and consist of not less than three (3) individuals, including at least two (2) with investment industry experience. The Investment Committee shall have primary responsibility for the oversight of Intcrfaith's Endowment and all other investment funds. The Investment Committee shall advise the board on the selection of investment managers, monitor investment results against goals, and review compliance with investment policies. The Investment Committee shall report to the Board of Directors quarterly regarding the work of the committee and current asset balances. The committee shall annually make a complete report of portfolio results compared to benchmark organizations and national performance standards. The Investment Committee shall perform such other functions and have such other responsibilities regarding the investment affairs of Interfaith and any entity under Interfa.ith's direct or indirect control as the board detennines 
2.5 Governance Committee. The Governance Committee shall meet at least annually and consist of not less than three (3) individuals, each of whom shall be members of the Board of Directors of Interfaith. Except for meetings concerning the performance and compensation 
14 



of the Executive Director, and unless informed otherwise by the Board of Directors, the Executive Director shall be eligible to attend Governance Committee meetings. The Governance Committee shall: 
2.5.1 Periodically examine the bylaws of Interfaith and Affiliated Organizations and make recommendations to the Board concerning its bylaws; 
2.5.2 Nominate in advance of the annual meeting and at other times when vacancies are to be filled, candidates to serve as members of the Board of Directors or elected as officers of the Board; 
2.5.3 Monitor attendance of regular Board of Directors meetings and make recommendations to the Board of Directors in compliance with Article IV, Section 1 O; 
2.5.4 No less than annually, review the performance of the Executive Director and make recommendations to the Board related to the compensation of such individual; 
2.5.5 Subject to the contractual rights of the person serving in such position, annually review the performance review of the Chief Executive Officer (prepared by the Executive Director) and make recommendations to the Board related to the compensation of such individual; and 
2.5.6 Provide for an annual evaluation of the Board of Directors and the overall governance function. 
2.4 Audit Committee. The corporation shall have an audit committee consisting of not less than three (3) individuals. Directors who receive, directly or indirectly, any consulting, advisory, or other compensatory fees from the corporation may not serve on the audit committee. Members of the audit committee shall not receive compensation for serving on the committee. A majority of the members of the audit committee may not concurrently serve as members of the Finance Committee, and the chair of the Audit Committee may not serve on the Finance Committee. Whenever practical, the Board will attempt to include non-director members who have expertise regarding audits. This committee will meet not less than semi-annually. The duties of the Audit Committee will include recommendations to the Board regarding the engagement of auditors, conferring with the auditor regarding the corporation's financial affairs, the annual review of the audit, and monitoring compliance with audit recommendations. 
2.5 Development Committee. The membership of the Development Committee shall consist of at least five (5) individuals, at least three (3) of whom will be directors of Interfaith. The Development Committee will provide overall policy guidance regarding marketing, communication and development activities. This Committee will lead in engaging all the directors broadly in the fund development activities oflnterfaith. 
2.6 Faith Leaders Council. The membership of the Faith Leaders Council shall consist of leaders from the faith community, at least one (l) of whom will be a director of Interfaith. 
15 
The Faith Leaders Council will be selected from faith leaders that serve General Member faith communities. The Faith Leaders Council will advise Interfaith regarding the needs of the General Members and the individuals served by Interfaith. 
2.7 Membership Committee. The Membership Committee shall consist of at least four ( 4) individuals, at least one (I) of whom will be a director of Interfaith. The Membership Committee will strenf,rthen faith center membership within Interfaith, focusing on increasing referrals for service, volunteer projects, and in-kind and monetary support from member faith centers. The Membership Committee will also review and recommend new faith center members for full board approval. 
2.8 Lin1itations. Each advisory committee shall: 

2.7.1 Limit its activities to the accomplishment of the task for which it 1s appointed; 
2.7.2 Have no power to act except as specifically conferred by resolution of the Board of Directors; 
2.7 .3 Recommend to the Board of Directors action to be taken relative to task assignment; and 
Section 3 Additional Committees. The Board Chair may appoint special purpose committees as needed. 
Article VIII 
INDEMNIFICATION 
The Board of Directors shall have the discretion to indemnify any person who was or is a party or is threatened to be made a party to any proceeding by reason of the fact that such person is or was a Director, Officer, employee, or other agent (as defined in Section 5238 of the Nonprofit Public Benefit Corporation Law of the State of California) of Interfaith, to the full extent allowed under the provisions of said Section 5238 relating to the power of a corporation to indemnify any such person. The amount of such indemnity shall be so much as the Board of Directors determines and finds to be reasonable, or, if required by said Section 5238, the amount of such indemnity shall be so much as the court determines and finds to be reasonable. 
Article IX 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Section l Amendment. These Bylaws may be amended, by the vote of the Members, at any regular or special meeting of the Members provided that a presentation of such proposed amendments or, in the alternative, a full copy of the proposed revised bylaws, shall have been published in the notice calling the meeting. 


FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND INDEPENDENT AUDITOR'NS REPORT INTERFAITH COMMUNITY SERVICES, INC. 
JUNE 30, 2018 



CONTENTS Page 3 
6 7 8 9 NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 10-23 
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION: 
SCHEDULE OF EXPENDITURES OF FEOERZU. AWARDS NOTES TO SCHEDULE OF EXPENDITURES OF FEDERAL AWARDS INDEPENDENT AUDITOR'NS REPORT ON INTERNAL CONTROL 


OVER FINANCIAL REPORTING A."'ID ON COMPLIANCE AND GOVERNMENT AUDITING STANDARDS 27-28 
29­

FEDERAL AWARDS 32-33 
CASAWORKS APARTMENTS 99-FM.TW-010 STATEMENT OF OPERATIONS 34-35 
CASAWOR.KS APARTMENTS 99-FMTW-010 STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS 36 



Ih"DEPENOENT AUDITOR'$S REPORT 
To the Audit Comm.i ttee Interfaith Community Services, Inc. Escondido, California 
Report on the Financial Statements We have audited the accompanying financial statements of Interfaith Comm.unity Services I Inc.$, (the "Organization'') 1 which comprise the statement of financial position as of June 30 1 2018, and the related statements of activ1ties, functional expenses, and cash flows for the year then ended, and the related notes to the financial statements$. 
Mana.gement18s Responsibility for the Financial Statements Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of these financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.; this includes the design, implementation, and maintenance of internal control relevant to the preparation and fair presentation of financial statements that are free from material misstatrunent, whether due to fraud o.r error 
.itor;$s Responsibility Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial. s ta tern.en ts based on our audit. We conducted our audit in accordance with auditing standards general.ly accepted in the United States of America and the standards applicable to financiaJ. audits contained. in Government Auditing Standards$1 issued by the Comptroller General of the United States. Those standards requirethat we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free from material misstatement. 
An audit involves performing procedures to obtain audit evidence about the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements$. The procedures selected depend on the auditor's judgement, including the assessment of the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to fraud or error. In makingthose risk assessments, the auditor considers internal control relevant to the Organization's preparation and fair presentation of the financial statements in order to design audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Organi%ation's internal control. Accordingly, we express no such opinion. An audit also includes evaluating the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the financial statements. 


INDEPENDENT 
AUDITOR'$S REPORT Page 2 
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a. basis £or our audit opinion. 
Qeinion In our opinion, the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of Interfaith Community Services, Inc.$, as of June 30$1 2018, and the changes in its net assets and its ca.sh flows for the year then ended in accordance with accounting principles generally acceptedin the United States of America. 
Other Matters 
Supplemental Information our audit was conducted for the purpose of forming an opinion on the financial statements as a whole. The accompanying schedule of expenditures of federal awards, as required by Title 2 U.S. Code of Federal Regulations Part 200, Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles I and Audit Requirements for Federa.1 AwardsI is presented for purposes of additional analysis and is not a requiredpart of the financial statements. Such information is the responsibility of management and was derived from and relates directly to the underlying accounting and other records used to prepare the financial statements. The information has been subjected to the auditing procedures applied in the audit of the financial statements and certain additional procedures, including comparing and reconciling such information directly to the underlying accounting and other records used to prepare the financial statements or to the financial statements themselves, and other additional procedures in accordance with auditing standards genera.l1y accepted in the United States of lunerica . In our opinion, the information is fairly stated, in all material respects; in relation to the financial statements as a whole. 
Other Reporting Required by Government Auditing$.Standards In accordance with Government Audi ting Standards, we have also issued our report dated November 26, 2018, on our consideration of the Organization's .internal control over financ:i.al reporting and on our tests of its compliance with certain provisions of la.ws, regulations, contracts and g.rant agree.men ts and other matters, The purpose of that report is to describe the scope of our testing of internal control over financial reporting and compliance and the results of that testing, and not to provide an opinion on internal control. over financial reporting or on compliance$. That report is an integral part of an a.udit performed in accordance with Government Auditing Standards in considering the Organization's interna1 control over financial reporting and compliance. 

INDEPENDENT AUDITOR'$S REPORT Page 3 
O,t.ber Matter 


Our audit was conducted for the purpose of forming an opinion on the financial statements of the Organization taken as a whole. The accompanying information for CASAWorks Apartments 99-FMTW-010, statement of operations on page 34-35 a.nd CASAWorks Apartments 99­FMTW-010, statement of cash flows on page 36, are presented for purposes of additional analysis and are not a required part of the basic financial statements$. Such information is the responsibility of management and was derived from and relates directly to the underlying accounting and other records used to prepare the financial statements$. The information has been subjected to the auditing procedures applied in the audit of the basic financial state..ents and certain additional procedures, including comparing and reconciling such info:r:mation directly to underlying accounting and other records used to prepare the financial statements or to the financial statements themselves and other additional procedures in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted the Uni. ted Stat.es of America. In our opinion I the infonnation is fairly stated in all material respects in relation to the financial statements taken as a whole. 
GURR.ERA & ASSOCIATES 

San Diego, Ca1ifornia Noveml:>er 26, 2018 




INC. 2018 

ASSETS 
ASSETSN: 

$ 3,950, 667 
Grants and contracts receivable Prepaid expenses and other current assets 
Property and equ.ipment, net of accumulated depreciation 
TOTAL ASSETS 
LIABILITIES AND NET ASSETS 
Accounts payable $ 151,830 Accrued expenses 690,218 Accrued interest 5451 019 Notes payable -. ,041,041 

TOTAL LIABILITIES 5,428, 
h.T ASSETS$: 
Unrestricted: Ondesignated Board designated long-term 

19,289,331 
Temporarily restricted 723,024 Permanently restricted 
5,482,843 
TOTAL NET ASSETS 
TOTAL LIABILITIES AND NET ASSETS 






INTERFAITH COMMUNITY SERVICES, INC. STATEMENT OF ACTIVITIES ForCt.ha yGar endQd June 30, 2018 
Temporarily Permanently 1Jnre5t;ti,ctod R<i,Hll !;,;t:.-t;te. . R.,t;i;::ici;;e,£L 
REVENUE and SUPPORTC: Contract revenue $ 7,188,312 $ -o-$ -0· $ 7,188,312 Contributions 5,234,353 513,528 119,141 5,867,02, In.kind donations 1,034,081 -o-·0-1,034,081 Ronta.l income 626,00B -o--0·~ 626,C000 Investment return 528,412 -o--0· 528,412 Oth&:t: income 8,281 .s• O·· -o-8,281 Gain on the d.J.sposal of fixed asgcts 543,435 o--o-543C,435, Net assets relea1:1,ed from restricn::ionsC, satisfaction of progra:m restrictions -·--0.::-._-_Q-
Total R.vmnue and Support 15,625,200 51,210 U9,141 15,795,551 
EXPENSES: 
Program SffirvicG.C: SupportivQ services 2,223,471 -o-"'o-2, 22.3, 471 Clinical 200,666 -o-200,C666 
-0­
•• o­
-o-
HousingC, 6heltera 5,983,211 Employment and eccmomic development 1,1.18,486 
5,C983,211 
-0­

Recovery and wellness 1,989,528 Other collffliunity se:r:vicel!! 
1,110C,486 1,989,528 4,4.0C, 320 
-{)­
-o­
___4 .,,..4 0 ,32Q 
-!') 
Total Program Services U, 955,602 -0-··O" llC, 955,C662 
Supporti.ng SE!rvice:1.1C: Ma.nagement and general 1,291 780 -0-1,291,780 Fundrai£1J.ng 7'"".., 901 
-o­
-TOTAL EXPF!NSES -it::. 
Total Supporting Services _.......:,2...,. '"""019. 681. -Q-0­
Increase (decrGase} in net Q$SQt6 1,648,837 51,210 119,141 1,819,168 Net Asuu!iitt:1 -Beginning of year . Net A..set.s -End of year 
See notes to financiai .tatements and independent auditor's report 
-7­
INTERFAITH COMMUNITY SERVICES, INC. STA'I'EMENT OF FUNCTIONAL EXPENSES For the year ended June 30t, 2018 
___________________......;P_,r,..o"-g=:r-=am""· Servip"""e=s___________ ____s.....u""'p....12.,...
0.,ting ...rvice. 
Employ-nt 01:.l'U!!l't 
Total 
1, .:coriomie m:"Jlling & ll.ec.:nr .. cy i. Commuruty MAn•uiemcn t l"Ufletional
Dov.lop-n t C:Uaj<;al Sh.l.8.,a.-s .. F"it::H tr,,g.,!.,_ .d .l}<Jl:ill !:\!;n.nising Tot2i 
_EEe_,.,...s,:u, 
Wa9e11, eal,u:;ioll, eontr11u:::t 111.bor, and .loyeo
benefitll $ l,,'J'1,()00 $ 119,ll"'I $ 186,07'1 $ 2,.433,161 $ l, 856 $ 279 485 $ G,2!.l!l,695 S 929,4!/i2 $ ¢45,697 $81,375,159 $ 7 ,6)51, 854 
Li •ting llUJ ai II tlli.TICtl 583,000 24,290 5,537 801 ,£14!', .101 ,J95 1,654,166 -o--o-"' O• 1,654,166 'l.'.ra.ui.ing IU'l.d 
Qll!Ploym,,m t l'l.ttl!I.Uttam::u 14,634 192,8225 ·O· :i ,IH.15 542 .o-:U08,4lH, 101,416 <i.!U,000 684,90$ 
·0--o-:1108,496 
o.ttico 
46, "100 
'1,561 63,21!) 178,012 lJi ,2!H> U,023 
n:it,ss2 1,01,a,:rn 
··0­
116,Hn 124,963 U.IUfl 2, nlJ 2,281 4, lHM 2,289,8565 
.1.708,U2 31138,8664 U,556 21/18,835 12 , 861 
·0--o­
)618,839'1 
Oepr.•ciation 
55J8,812 109,8560 5688,.:Hifl 1,,01; 
-0··
Int:oroi,t 
JS8,611 
73,943 
OpE1l:'llltion11 &nd 111.>PJ?O:Ct !llftl:'ViClilEI 103,!i:.?., 2,584 LHJ,873:l 
9,&l) 
6, 62'1 
6,ti:2'l 
-0­
Othttt' 
l9 771 
2,5. __ .,,Ji;! , 0 3 7 ··-···.:ui 
62,UQ .$,Jll 
__ll..,,ill . 
JlJ.,_aJ3 



_:q.,l..!i 
Tot.id .nt111111 . . ...,U . . . . . .•, 1101 . ,l, 0208. 61111 . 
11 of l::Otlll @<Xp<ilfllllQ bya.ct.ivj,ty 15. 9'1 li.O\ l.H 42,13\ 14 :i!\ 3.2\ as.si !L.3'1, 5,2'1; 14.S"i 100 O:t. 

See note!I to financial statements and .independent auditor'ts report .El­



INTE.AITH COMMUNITY SERVICES, INC. 
STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS 
For the year ended June 30s, 2018 
CASH FLOWS FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIESs: 
Increase in net assets $ 1,819,s188 
Adjustments to reconcile increase in net assets 
to net cash provided by operating activitiess: 
Depreciation 568e,368 Realized and unrealized gain on investments (499,996) Realized gain on the sale of property and 
equipment (542,435)Contribution of securities (282,233) Contribution of er.dowment (113,e141) 
Changes in operating assets and liabilitiess: Contracts receivable (1e,352e,046) Prepaid expenses and other current assets 181,s619 Accounts payable 32e1 525 
Accrued expenses 198,e719 
Accrued interest 50.t353 
Net cash provided by operating activities 
CASH FLOWS FROM INVESTING ACTIVITIESs: 
Purchases of property and equipment (1,946,618) Sale of property 2,141$,$912 
Proceeds from sales of investments 635s407 
Net cash provided by investing activities 830s,701 
CASH FLOWS FROM FINANCI G ACTIVITIES: 
Principal payments on capital lease (20I 839)Payments on notes payable (543,501) 
Net cash used by financing activities (554s. 340) 
NET INCREASE !N CASH 331s,282 
CASH, BEGINNING OF YEAR 3,619s.s385 
CASH$, END OF YEAR $ 3,950,667 
SUPPLEMENTAL DISCLOSURE OF CASH FLOW INFORMATION$: 
Interest paid . 71,549 
SUPPL.NTAL DISCLOSURE OF NONCASH FINANCING TRANSACTION$: 
New financing on property purchase $ 1,200,00. 
See notes to financial statements and independent auditor's report 
-9­








INTERFAITH COMMUNITY SERVICES, INC. NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS June 30, 2018 
NOTE A -ORGANIZATION AND SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES 
NATURE OF ACTIVITIES 
Inc.$, (the "Organization"} is a 
1982 to assist persons needing assistance in meeting basic human needs such as food, clothing, The Organization provides a variety of including tra.nsi tional housing, shelters and homes, low income housing, veterans' services, and other community services principally in North San Diego County, California area. 
USE OF ESTIMATES 
The preparation of financial statements in 
with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make esti.mates and assumptions that afi:ect amounts and disclosures$. Aaoordi.ngly1 actual could differ from those estimates$. 
FINANCIAL 
STATEMENT PRESENTATION 
• Temporarily restricted net assets consist of contributed 
funds subject to 
contingent upon specific performance of a future event or a specific 

information regarding its financial position to three classes of net assets; net temporarily restricted net assets, and permanently restricted net assets. 
• Unrestricted 
net represent expendable funds available £or operations, which are not otherwise li.mi ted by donor restrictions$. 
of time before 
• Permanently restricted net assets to irrevocable donor restrictions requiring that the assets be maintained in perpetuity, usually for the purpose of generating invesbnent income to fund current operations. 





-10­


INTER.FAITH COMMUNITY SERVICES; 
INC. 
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS -(Continued) June 30, 2018 
NOTE A -ORGANIZATION AND STJMJ:.fARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (Continueid) 
FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS 
The Organization defines 
fair value as the exchange price 
that would be received £or an asset or paid for a liability in the 
principal or most advantageous market$. The Organization 
applies fair value measurements to assets and liabilities that are required to be recorded at fair value under accepted accounting principles. value measurement techniques maximize the use of unobservable inputs$, value hierarchy based on the transparency of inputs$. The three levels are defined as follows$: 
Level$l -Inputs to the valuation methodology are quoted 
prices (unadjusted) for identical 
assets or active markets$. 
Level 2 -the valuation methodology include 
quoted or liabilities in active inputs that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly or indirectly, 
for substantially the same term of the financial 
instrument. 

Level 3 -Inputs to the valuation me unobservable and significant to the fair value measurement 
A financial 
instrument'$s categorization 
within the valuation 


hierarchy is based upon the of input that is 
significant to the fair value measurement. 
The carrying values of cash, receivables, and payable approximate fair value 
as of 30, 2018, due to the relative short maturi of these instruments$. 
CASH EQUIVALENTS 
The Organization considers all highly liquid investments with an original maturity of three months 
or less to 
be cash equivalents$. 






-11­





INTERFAITH COMMUNITY SERVICES, INC. NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS -(Continued) June 30, 2018 

NOTE A -ORGAfl!Z.ATION AND SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICES (Continued) 
GRANTS AND CONTRACTS RECEIVABLE 
The grants and contracts receivable arise in the normal course of operations$. It is the policy of management to review the outstanding receivable at year end, as well as the bad debt write-offs experienced in the past, and establish an all.owance for doubtful accounts for uncollectible a.mounts$. No allowance was considered necessary at June 30, 2018, because management believes that all amounts are collectible. 
PROMISES TO GIVE 
Unconditional written pledges to the Organization in the future are recorded as promises to give and revenue in the year promised at the present value of expected cash flows, see Note E. Unconditional written pledges must be evidenced bydonor signature a.nd deemed legal.ly enforceable by the Soard of Directors$. Conditional pledges are recognized as revenue when the conditions are met. Intentions to pledge are recognized as revenue when the funds are actually received. After pledges a.re originally 
recorded, an allowance for uncollectible pledges may be established based on specific circumstances. 
INVESTMENTS 
The Organization has investments held by the Jewish Community Foundation of San Diego and Rancho Santa Fe Foundation, which are invested in various 
pools and are valued at the Organiza..tion' s percentage interest in the total. pools, At June 30, 2018, these pools included domestic and international equities, domestic and international fixed income, and other investments$. All investments have been recorded at fair market value using a market approach$. The fair values of investments in securities traded on national exchanges are valued a.t the closing price on the last day of business of the fiscal year. The fair value of other investments is determined byinvestment managers in good faith using methods appropriate, and are subject to oversight and review by the management of the Jewish Community Foundation San Diego and Rancho Santa Fe Foundation, Realized and unrealized gains: and losses on investments are included in the change in net assets in the Statement of Activities$. 


-12­





INTERFAITH COMMUNITY SERVICES, INC. NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS -(Continued) June 30, 2018 
NOTE A -ORGANIZATION AND SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (Continued) 
PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT 
Acquisitions 
of property and equipment of $5,000 or more are 
capitalized. Property and equipment are stated at cost1 or if donated, at the approximate fair market value at the date of donation. Expenditures 
for maintenance 
and repairs are chargedagainst operations$. Depreciation computed using the straight-line met.hod over the estimated useful lives of the related assets from five to thirty-nine years$. 
received a.re recorded as unrestricted, restricted 
or permanently restricted support, on the existence and/or nature of any donor restrictions. 
A1l donor-restricted support is reported as an increase in temporarily or permanently 
restricted net assets, 
depending on 
the nature of the When a 
restriction expires is1 when a time restriction ends restriction is accomplished) , 
net assets are reclassif.ied to net and reported in the Statement of as released from restrictions$. 
received with donor-imposed restrictions that are satisfied within the same reporting period are reported as unrestricted support in that period. Revenue from grants and contracts are recognized 
to the extent of eligible costs incurred up to an amount not to exceed the total grant 
and contract authorized. 
CONTRIBUTED M]I..TERIALS .ANO SERVICES 
Contributed materials are recorded at their fair market value where an objective basis is available to measure Such items are capital h:ed or charged as appropriate$. services is reported as which the services are performed. the Organization receives a substantial amount of nonprofessional services donated by volunteers in the Organization's program services$. the generally accepted accounting principles a.s contributions and are therefore, not the financial statements, 




-13­
INTERFAITH COMMUNITY SERVICES, INC. 
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS -(Continued} 
June 30, 2018 
OTE A -ORGANIZATION AN'U SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICA.T ACCOtJNTING POLICIES 
(Continued) 
INCOME TAXES 
The Organization is exempt from federal income and California franchise taxes under Section 501 (c) (3) of the Internal Revenue Code and Section 2370l$(d) of the California Revenue and Taxation Codet,. respectively$. 
All tax-exempt Organizations are subject to review and audit by federal, state, and other applicable agenciess. Such agencies may review the taxability of unrelated business 
income; or the qualification of the Organization as a tax­exempt Organizat.on under Internal Revenue Code Section and applicable state statutes$. 
At June 30, 2018, the federal statue of limitations remains open for the 2015 through 2018 tax years$. The statute of limitations for the state income ta.x returns remains open for the 2014 through 2018 tax years$. 
NOTE B -CONCENTRATION OF CREDIT RISK 
Th Organization mainta ins cash balances in bank accounts which, at times$, exceed the federal insurable limit. The Organization has not experienced any losses from cash concentrations and man·agement does not believe the Organization is exposed to any significant risk$. 
NOTE C -PREPAID EXPENSES AND OTHER CURRENT ASSETS 
Other accounts receivable $ 73,$976 Prepaid insurance 14,837 Deposits and prepaid rent 20 / 034 Prepaid software 55.984 
Total other current assets 164,831 
$ = 
NOTE$D -UNAMORTIZED DONATED RENT 
In January 2014$, the Organization entered into a ten year agreement to provide Veterans services in exchange for free rent at 1617 Mission Avenue, Oceanside, CA. This agreement expires January 30, 2024$. The Organization began providing services at this location on April$l, 2014$. 
-14­


INTERFAITH COMMUNITY SERVICES, INC. NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS June 30, 2018 
NOTE$D 
-tinued) 


The unamortized donated rent of $148,806 represents the fair market va.lue of the rent for the ramaini.ng 67 months of this 
NOTE E -PROMISES TO GI'i'JE 

As of June 30, 2018, the Organh:ation did not have a.nypromises to give$, 
NOTE F -INVESTMENTS 
The Organization's Level 2 investments consist of endowment and long-term investment funds held by the Jewish Co.mmu.ni ty Foundation San Diego and endowment funds held by the Rancho Santa Fe Foundation in balanced pool portfolios that include primarily publicly traded securities. The Organization has variance power over the funds$. The pooled investments a.re categorized as Level 2 because they have no di.rect observable inputs$. 
The foll.owing table summarizes the valuation of the Organization'$s 
investments in accordance with authoritative fair value guidance at June 30, 2 8: 
Level l Level 2 
$ -o-$ 108,825 108,825 -o-1,676,665 1,t676,665 -o-2,728,263 2,$728,263 -o-2,485,783 2 485,783 -o-360,584 360,584 Other -o-168,272 168,272 . 71528,392 i 7 !528,392 
$ 312,540 
215,$872 

Investment return .for the year ended June 30, 2018, consisted 
g 494$!508 


-15­


INTERFAITH COMMUNITY SERVICES, INC. NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS June 30, 2018 
NOTE G 
PROPERTY JUID EQUIPMENT 
and equipment at June 
30, 2018, consisted of the Construction in progress $ 161,972 Land 6,038,870 
Buildings 15,2161782 Leasehold improvements 632$1822 Furniture and equipment 6081343 
Software 27,395 
Vehicles 238,404 22,924,$588 Less accumulated depreciation 
NOTE ff -LINE OF CREDIT 

The Organization has a line of credit 
with First Citizens Bank in the amount of $500,000 that is property of the Organization. at the greater of 1. 0% above the Wall Street Journal's prime rate 

or the floor rate of 5.75%$. of credit 2019. The Organization had no 2018. 
NOTE I -NOTES PAYABLE 
Notes payable at June 30, 2018 
consisted of the following: 
Note payable to First Citizens Bank in monthly 

payments 
of $11,390 including interest at 3.25% per annum, secured byreal property, due April 2021$. $ l, 005, 926 

Note payable to City of Escondido for $443,000, secured by real property, due December 2018. Annual payments of principaland interest (3.00% per annum) are due only to the extent that the Home Project provides positive cash flow. There were no payments made during the year ended June 30, 2018N. 443,000 





-16­
INTERFAITH CO.ITY SERVICES$, INC$. NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  
June 30$,  2018  
NOTE I  -NOTES PAYABLE  -(Continued)  
Note payable to Cit.z' of Escondido for $450t,000t, secured by real property, due June 2072$. Annua payments of principal a.nd interest (3$. OO, per annwn) are d.e only to the extent that the Home Project II provides positive cash flow.  450s,s000  
Note payable to Union Bank in aggregate monthly payments of $3$,$182 including interest at 4.50% perannuin$, secured by real property$, due July 2025$.  233$,$441  
Note payable  to First Citizens Bank secured by real  

property, 1820 S. Escondido Blvd.$, due June 5, 2033$. Monthly payments of principal and interest at 4.75% per annum. There were no payments made du.ing the 
year ended June 30, 2018. 1,200,000 
Note payable to the City of Oceanside (City) for $350s,000s, secured by real property, due 
Decembez-2065$. The City recorded a deed of trust that is subordinate to Wells Fargo Bank, NA. Annual p yments of principal and interest (3s.s00% per annum) are due only to the extent that the Garfield Program provides positive cash flow. There were no payments made during the year ended 
June 30, 2018. 350$,000 
Note payable to California Department of Housing and Community Development for $245,000, secured by real property, due July 2057$. Annual payments of principal and interest (3.00% per annum) are due only to the extent t:.hat the CASA Program provides positive cash flow$. The Development was constructed in 1964 and is made up of eight units$. There were no payments made 
during the year ended June 30 .. 2018. 245, 00 
Note payable to Wells Fargo Bank in monthlypayments of $1,416 includ.ing interest at 5. 50% per annum, secured by real property, remaining balance of principal and interest due December 
2020$. 
Mortgage payable to Greenwich Investors in monthly payments of $845 including adjustable rate interest interest of 0.50% above bank prime rate (4.$75i at June 30, 2018) secured by real property due June 
2025. 
-17­


INTERFAITH COMMUNITY SERVICES, INC$NOTES 
TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS June 30, 2018 

NOTE I 
-(Continued) 
Mortgage payable to Greenwich Investors in monthly payments of $1,060 including interest secured by real property1 due J'une 2019. 
Future principal 
payments on n.otes payable at June 30, 2018, are due as follows$: 
2019 $ 216,081 2020 661$,$537 2021 905,448 2022 105,412 2023 110,420 The.re after 2,042,143 f 4,041$!8041 
Notes payable contain certain financial and non-financial 
covenants for which the Organization was in compliance with as of June 30, 2018. 
NOTE J -COM:MITMENTS 
Operating Lea::;1es 
The Organization leases space for its Coastal Service Center California under an operating lease which April 2019. The monthly lease payment was Total rent expense was $18,604 for the 
year ended June 30, 2018. 
The Organi%ation leases office space for senior programs and administrative offices 1"rbich expires in August 2018. The monthl.y 1ease payment was $3,810$. Total lease expense was $44,610 for the year ended June 30, 2018. 
The Organization leases a van requiring monthly lease 
payments of $361 through lease maturity in August, 2018. Total lease expense was $4,322 for the year ended June 30, 2018. 


-18­



INTERFAITH COMMUNITY SERVICES, INC. NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS June 30, 2018 
NOTE J -COMMITMENTS -{Continued) The Organization leases eight copiers requiring monthly lease payments of $1$1 100 through lease maturity in July, 2021$. Total lease expense was $13,195 for the period ended June 30 1 2018$. 
The Organization leases one copier requiring lease payments of $128 through lease maturity in November, 2022. Total lease expense was $974 for the period ended June 301 2018$. 
The Orga.nization leases warehouse space which expires August 2020. The monthly lease payment was $4,041$. Total lease expense was $40,405 for the period ended June 30, 2018. 
Futu.re minimum lease payments under operating leases at June 30, 2018, are due as follows: 
Year Ending
June 30,2019 $ 87 950 2020 65,866 2021 ,548 2022 2,641 2023 642 
Total lease payments 
NOTE K -CONTINGE."lllCIES 
Grants and Contracts The Organization receives a signi.£icant portion of its revenue from government grants and contracts which are subject to audit. No provision has been made for anylia.bilities that may a.rise from such audits since the &nounts, if any, cannot be determined. Management believes that any liability which may result from these audits is not significant. 
Repayment ContingengyThe Organization received a contribution of $463,$
907 
2003 from the City of Escondido that was used to purchase its headquarters which is included in property and equipment in the Statement of Financial Position$. The contribution amount is to be repaid in the event that the property is sold or is no longer used for its designated purpose. 
The Organization has not expressed intent to sell property and plans to continue to operate the facility consistent with it18s designated purpose$. 


INTERFAITH COMMUMITY SERVICES, INC. NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS June 30, 2018 
NOTE K -CONTINGENCIES -(Continued) 
Litigation In the normal course of operations$, the Organization is occasionally named as a defendant in various lawsuits$. It is the opinion of management and of legal counsel. that the outcome of any pending lawsuits will not materially affect the operations or the financial position of the Organization. 
NOTE L  -TEMPORARILY RESTRICTED NET ASSETS  
Temporarily restricted net following at June 30$, 2018$:  assets  were  available  for  the  
Purpose and Time Restrictions$: Employment services Coastal services  $ 30,359 300 ,  
Transitional Youth Academy Teens teaching tech Veteran behavioral health Senior services Housing assistance Food distribution  14 798 18,$838 80,384 12$,773 4,$318 70 130  
Immigration services Other Time Restrictions$:  31$,$125 lls,s493  
Unamortized donated rent  

NOTE M -PERMANENTLY RESTRICTED ENDOWMENT 
The Organization's donor-restricted endowment consists of pooled funds at the Jewish Community Foundation of San Diego and Rancho Santa Fe Foundation and is established for a variety of purposes including to serve children1s needs and those of their families. As required by generally accepted accounting principles; net assets associated with endowment funds are classified and reported based on the existence or absence of donor-imposed restrictions. 
The Board of Directors of the Organization has interpreted the Oniform Prudent Manage..ent of Institutional Funds Act (''OPMIFA") as requiring the preservation 0£ the fair value of the original gift as of the gift date of the donor-restricted endowment funds absent explicit donor stipulations to the contrary. 
-20­
119,141 
INTERFAITH COMMUNITY SERVICES, INC, MOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS June 30, 2018 
NOTE M -PERMANENTLY RESTRICTED ENDOWMENT -(Continued) 
As a result of this interpretation, the Organization classifies as permanently restricted net assets the original value of gifts donated to the perm.anent endowment1 
(b) 
the original value of subsequent gifts to the permanent endowment, and (c) accumulations to the permanent endowment made in accordance with the direction of the applicable donor gift instrument at the time the accumulation is added to the fund. The remaining portion of the donor-restricted endowment fund that is not classified in permanently restricted net assets is classified as temporarily restricted net assets until those a.mounts are appropriated for expenditure by the Organization in a manner that is consistent with the standard of prudence prescribed by UPMIFA. In accordance with UPM!FA, the Organization considers the following factors in making a determination to appropriate or accumulate donor-restricted endowment funds$: 

1) 
The duration and preservation of the fund. 

2) 
The pu.rposas of the Organization and the donor restricted end.owmen t fund . 

3) 
General economic conditions. 

4) 
The possible effect of inflati.on and deflation. 

5) 
The expected total return from income and the appreciation of investments$. 

6) 
Other resources of the Organization. 

7) 
The investment policies of the Organization$. 


At June 30,2018, the endowment net asset composition typeof fund, consisted of the following: 
Temporarily PermanentlyUnrestricted Restricted Rest.rieted Oono=-restricted endowmimt funds 
=$=-.4=4='=6=6=4 
Changes in endowment net assets for the year ended June 30, 2018, consisted of the following: 
Temporarily Permanently Unrestricted RQstricted Restricted £ndowment net assetse, b.ginning of year { 42,960) $ -a-$ s,363,102 $ s,320,134 
Activity: Donations -o--0­
119,141 204,244 
204C,244 -o-
Interest and dividends Realized and unrealiz:ed 
112,756 -o--0-112C,756 {25,525) 
gai.."ls 
-o--o-
Investment expenseAppropriations 
(25,525} 
-o --o­
{263,843) 
(263,843) 
Net Activity 87,632 -o-Endowment net assets, end of year $ -o­
51482,843 
i 
.5,527,SOJ, 
-21­
INTERFAITH 
COM!-IDNITY SERVICES, INC. NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS June 30, 2018 
NOTE M -PERMANENTLY RESTRICTED ENDOWMENT -{Continued) 
Return Objectives and Risk Paramete:rs 

The Organization has adopted investment and spending policies 

In order features as asset of holding security, and investment quality sha.11 be applied, 
Investment Strategy 
The investment 
strategy of the Organization is 
to develop a diversified of passive investments$. For equity investments, the selection of 
such holdings is based on the 
merits of long-term ownership without the intent of short-te:cm trading. To achieve investment objectives, the Organization relies 
on a total return strategy in which investment 
returns are achieved through both capital appreciation {realized and unrealized) and current yield (interest and dividends)$. 
Spending Policy 

The 
Organization 
appropriating for distribution annually 5% of the averagelast twelve-quarter balances. The Organization expects endowment to meet This is consistent with the to providefunding for the operating expenses of programs 
well as to provide additional real growth through new gifts and investment return$. 
NOTE N -BOARD DESIGNATED LONG-TERM 




-22­


INTERFAITH COMMUNITY SERVICES INC$. NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS June 30, 2018 
NOTE N -BOAJU) DESIGNATED LONG-TERM -(Continued) These funds are invested in a manner lar to the permanently restricted endowment funds$. All earnings related to the board designated long-term funds are recorded in the undesignated net asset balance. Board designated long-term investments, 
beginning of yearBoard designated contributions Board releases Board designated long-term investments, 
end of year 
NOTE O -PENSION PLAN 
The Organization has a 401 (k) retirement plan which covers substantially all employees 18 years of age or older who have completed three months of service. A contribution to the Plan is paid monthly at a rate determined by the Board of Directors$. Employee contributions to Plan are at the discretion of each eligible employee and are matched by the Organization monthly at a percentage determined by the Board of Directors. For the year ended June 30, 2018, the Organization contributed at a rate of 1% employer contribution and a 1% employer match. The total employer contributions to the Plan for the year ended June 30 2018, were $93$1814. NOTE P -F"u'NCTIONAL ALLOCATION OF EXPENSES 

The costs of providing the various programs and other activities have been summarized on a functional basis the statements of act.iviti.es$. Accordingly, certain costs have been allocated among the programs and supporting services benefitted. 
NOTE Q -SUBSEQUENT EVENTS 

The Organization 
has evaluated subsequent 
events throughNovember 26, 2018, which is the date financial statements were available to be issued. 
-23­

INTERFAITH COMMUNITY SERVICES, INC. Schedule of Expenditures of F'edera.l Awards rear Ended June 30t, 2018 
Federal Federal/Pass-Through Grantor/Frogram/Cluster Title 
CFOA Contract Total Federal 
... Numbe;: 



Continuum of Car9  Program  -CHW  l4 267 14C. 267  
14C. 267  
Patui-through from County 0£ San DiogoC: Continuum of Car4il Progr,i,lU!l -Sh.lt1ou: Plus Care Emergency Solution:; Grant ProgramPassed through to Catholic Charities Hotel/Motel Voucher Serv:i.ce!ll Pass-th.rough from City of EscondidoC: E111e.rgency Sol.ut1.ons Grant Proi:;rram EmergQncy Sol.utions Grant ProgramPas.-through from City of C;u::-l . .sbadC: CDBG -Coastal Services  14C.C267 14 231 14C.231 l4C. 218 14C. 231 14C.231. 14C. 218  
Pass-through from City of Vista, CDBG -S9nior Services  14. 218  
from City of Escondido via AllJ.;;,ince for  
Haven Hou.ee  H.C218  
progi:amC: HVRP-Hol:lu;Jl@ss Female Votarans -Veterans wiCth Familiaa Pass-though from San Di.0go Workforce PartnershipC: W!OA Youth Aetivitim:i -TYA WIOA  17C,CBOS 17C.259  
Passed through to Mira CoBta Pass-through from California Employ11111mt:, DevelopC. W!A Adult Program -VEAP  D@pt  n.2s9 17. 258  

programsC: Continuum 0£ CarQ Program -Ca$aWorks l4 ,267 Continuum 0£ Care Program -Raymond's Refug. 14. 267 Continutm of Car\\ll Program -Spruce :Street 14. 26'7 Continuum o:f Caro Program ~· R1;mtal Ass:u:itance Prog.r;aitt 14 .267 
Cont.inuum of Car@ Program Home Now 14. 267 Pass-through from Community Housing WorksC: 
See Independent Auditor's Report and Notes -24­
CA07llI,900ll 609 $ 50,C830 CA0944L90011607 91,103 CA0710L90011609 47,101 CAl253L9DOll603 216,420 CAl 6C>lt9DO 11600 440,746 CA0703L9DOU609, 98,377 CA0709L900l1609 5 CA1025L9DO 11602 
CA0693L9D011609 187,588 556440 459,652 556440 208,543 557288 854, (H35 
E-16-MC-06-0552 11,061 66C,.293 
N/A 7,923 
N/A 10,0()() 
N/A 
' 
HV-:10 921-1 7
-G0-'5-6 11, 9,432 193-2!> 279 I 482 193-29 51C,275 K7l06365 
to Scheduie of Federal Awards 

Expenditures to 
__Sub:reqi pj, ents 
208,C543 
206, 
5l.C, 275 
51, 275 
INTERFAITH COMMUNITY SERVICES, INC. 
Schedule of Expenditure.s of Federal. Awards -(Continued) 
Year Ended June 30 , 20'1 8 
Fedecal ExpondiLures Federal/Pass-Through Grantor/Program/ClU9ter •ri tle CFDA Contr.=ict Total Fedoral to (Continued) N_umb:e_,; Nl,lmber :t_,cpendi.tures Sub_.ro_cipien t!:. 
U.S. Deportment of Health and Hum.n Servicoo Paas-through from County of San Diego: 
CSBG -Fami1y Sclf-Su£ficiency -Coastal 93.56') 54443::3 189,379 Passed through to Catholic Chorities !,)J.C.69 544433 596 
591':i 
CSBG -Faaily Solf-Suff.ciency -Inl.nd 93.569 5'14'13<: CSBG -Communities in Action -Inland 93.C5G9 SE,1909 557909
Paseod through to E0condido Education COMPACT 93.569 National Family Caregivor Support 
20,C429 
5,158 
:, , 158 
490,C034 
DQpart:l!lont of Homeland Secur.ty 
Pa&D-through from Catholic Cha.r.tiP..: 
Emergency Food and Sheltor Na.tionnL Board Program 4·1. 024 N/'A. 33,fll 
33,471 
-;I:ra;'1_.su 
Volunteer Tncnme Ta,; An:nistano 
54C,500 
-Minor Home Ropo.ir 9).052 553Hil 
5,754 
21. 009 l 7Vl'l:AUl 16 
Total Expend.i ttu::,;is or Federal Awards 

U.S. D YAtAra__Tl _Mf_ai. 
. ProvidorD Grant & Per Diam Program.-Ocennsido VA Ho.oiess Prov1dorD Grant t Per DiCJJl Program-11.ster 
VA Homeless Providers C.ant & Per Diam Program-Merla'Cs Placo 
VA. Hocelesn Provider.fl GrantC, Po.r Diem Program-Rocuperative Beds VA Homeless Prov1derD GrantC, Par Diem Program-Bridge Housing VA Supportivo Sorvices for Vetaran FamilieR Program 
Passad through to People Assistinq tho Ho.meleso 
64.024 64C.02'1 64C.024 64 .. 024 64C.C024 f,4C. 033 64.033 
07-716-CA 98C-027-CA 05-016-CA 
VA262-12-0-0l.44 
ICS1714C-0325-664-BHC-18-0 Cl5-CJ\-601B Cl5·-·Cl\-601B 
-l61,C792 l.C,282 
43,C5J6 :585C,C957 U.!',C,5·74 221,140 162,2-1:il 
1. 591. 580 
162, :l_8 
162,1, 281 
See .Iodopendent Auditor'Cs Report and Notes t-.o Schedule of Fcde.ral Awards -25­



INTERFAITH COMMUNITY SERVICES, INC. 
NOTES TO SCHEDULE OF EXPENDITURES OF FEDERAL AWARDS Jurua 30, .2018 
1. 

The accompanying Schedule of Expenditures 

of Federal Awards includes the federal award activity of the Organization under programs of the federal government for the The inforination in this Schedule is presented in accordance with the requirements of Title 2 0.S. Code of Federal Regulations Pa.rt 200, Uniform Administrative 
Frincipl.es, and Audit Requirements for Federal. (Uniform Guidance) . Because selected portion of the 
it is not intended to and does not present the financial position, changes in net assets or cash flows of the Organization$. 2. Su.mmary of Significant Accounting Policies 
Expenditures 

reported on the Schedule are reported on 
the 
Such expenditures are recognized following the cost principles contained in Uniform Guidance wherein certain types of expenditures 
are not allowable or are 
as to reimbursement. Organization .identifying nwn.bers are presented where available. 
3. Indirect Cost. Rate 
The Organization is using agreed upon indirect cost rates stipulated in it's contracts and has elected not to use the 10 percent de minim.us 
indirect cost rate as allowed under the Un1form Guidance. 




-26­

INDEPENDENT AUDITOR'S REPORT ON INTERNAL CONTROL OVER FINANCIAL REPORTING AND 011 COMPLIANCE AND OTHER MATTERS BASED ON AN AUDIT OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS PERFORMED IN ACCORDANCE WITH GOVERNMENT AUDITING STANDARDS 
To the Audit Committee 
Interfaith Community Services, Inc. 
Escondido$1 California 
We have audited, in accordance with the auditing standards generally accepted in the United States of America and the standards applicable to financial audits contained in Government Auditing Standards issued by the Comptroller General of the United States, the financ1al statements of Interfa1th Community Services, Inc, (the "Organization"} which comprise the statement of financial position as of June 30, 2018, and related statements of activities, functional expenses, and cash flows for the year then ended, and the related notes to the financial statements, and have issued our report thereon dated November 26, 2018. 
Internal Control Over Financial Reporting 
In planning and performing our audit of the financial statements, we considered the Organization's internal control over financial reporting to determine the audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances for the purpose of expressing our opinion on the financial statements, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Organiza.t.ion' s internal. control$. Accordingly f we do not express an opinion on the effectiveness of the Organization's internal control. 
A deficiency in internal control exists when the design or operation of a control does not allow management or employees, in the normal course of performing their assigned functions, to prevent, or detect and correct1 misstatements on a timely basis. A material weakness is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies$, in internal control such that there is a reasonable possibility that a material misstatement of the Organization's financial statements will not be prevented, or detected and corrected on a timely basis. A signifi.cant deficiency is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal control that less severe than a material weakness, yet important to merit attention by those charged with governance. 
-27­
Page 2 
Our consideration of internal control was for the limited purpose described the f:irst paragraph of this section and was not designed to identify all deficiencies in internal control that might be material wea.kn.esses or significant deficiencies. Given these limitations, during our audit we did not identify anydeficiencies in internal control that we consider to be material weaknesses. However, material weaknesses may exist that have not been identified. 
ComRliance and Other Matters 
As part of obtaining reasonable assurance a.bout whether the Organization'$s financial statements are free from material m.isstatanaent, we performed tests of its compliance with certain provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and grants agreements, noncompliance with which could have a direct and material effect on the determination of financia.1 .statement amounts. However, providing an opinion on compliance with those provisions was not an objective of our audit, and accordingly, we do not express such an opinion$. The results of our tests disclosed no instances of noncompliance or other matters that are required to be reportedunder Government Auditing Standards$. 
Pumose of this Re0ort 
The purpose of this report is solely to describe the scope of our testing of internal control and compliance and the results of that testing I and not to provide an op:inion cm the effectiveness of the Organization'$s internal control or on compliance. This report is an integral part of an audit performed in accordance with Government Auditing Standards in considering the Organization's internal control and compliance$. Accordingly, this communication is not suitable for any other purpose. 
.. : a.1--
Gurrera '& Associates 
San Diego, California November 26, 2018 

INDEPENDENT AUDITOR'$S REPORT ON COMPLIANCE FOR EACH MAJOR PROGRAM AND ON INTERNAL CONTROL OVER COMPLIANCE REQUIRED BY THE UNIFORM GUIDANCE 
To the Audit Committee 
Interfaith Community Services, Inc. Escondi.do, California 
Report on Comnliance for Each Ma-ior Federal Proaram 
We have audited Inter£ai th Community Servicest,. Inc.' s (the 
'Organization") compliance with the types of compliance requirements described in the OMS Compli.nce Supplement that could have a direct and material effect on each of Interfaith Community Services$, Inc.$' s major federal programs for the year ended June 30t, 2018$. Interfaith Community Services$, Inc.$'s major federal programs are identified in the summary of auditor's results section of the accompanying schedule of findings and questioned costs$. 
Management'$s Responsibilitv 
Management is responsible for compliance with the federal statutest, regulations, and the terms and conditic.s of its federal awards applicable to its federal programst. 
Auditor's Responsibilitv 
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on compliance fo. each of Interfaith Community Services, Inc.'s major federal programs based on our audit of the types of compliance requirements referred to above$. We conducted ou. audit of compliance in accordanca with audi. ting standards generally accepted in the United States of America; the standards applicable to financial audits contained in Government Audi ting Standards$, issued by the Comptroller General of the United States; and the audit .requirements of Title 2 U.S. Code of Federal Regulations Part 200, Uniform Acbninistrative Requirements$, Cost Principles$, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards (Uniform Guidance) . Those standards a.nd the Uniform Guidance require that we plan and perform the audit to ob ain reasonable assurance about whether noncompliance with the types of compliance requirements referred to above that could have a direct and material effect on a major federal program occurred. An audit includes examining, on a test basist, evidence about Interfaith Community Services$, Inc$. ' s compliance with those requirements and 
performing s'.lch other procedures as w. considered necessary in the circumstances$. 
We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion on compliance for each major federal program. Bowever, our audit does not provide a legal deteraination of Interfaith Community Services, Inc.'s compliance. 
-29­
Page 2 
Opinion of Each Maior Federal Program 
In our opinion Interfaith Community Services, Inc. complied, in all material respects, with the types of compliance requirements referred to above that could have a direct and material effect on each of its major federal programs for the year ended June 30, 2018$. 
Report on Internal Control over Compliance 
Management of Interfaith Community Services, Inc. is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective internal control over compliance with the types of compliance requirements referred to above. In planning and performing our audit of compliance, we considered Interfaith Commu.ni.t:.y Services, Inc.$' s internal control over compliance with the types of requirements that could have a direct and material effect on each major federal program to determine the auditing procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances for the purpose of expressing an opinion on comp.liance for each major .federal program and to test and report on internal control over compliance in accordance with the Uniform Guidance, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of internal control over compliance$. Accordingly, we do not express an opinion on the effectiveness of Interfaith Community Services, Inc.$'s internal control over compliance$. 
A deficiency in internal control over compliance exists when the design or operation of a control over compliance does not allow management or employees, in the normal course of perfornring their assigned functions to prevent or detect and correct, noncompliance with a type of compliance requirement of a federal program on a. timely basis$. A material weakness :i.n internal control over compliance is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal control over compliance, such that there is a reasonable possibility that material noncompliance with a type of compliance requirement of a federal program will not be prevented, or detected and corrected, on a timely basis$. 
A significant deficiency in internal control over compliance is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal control over compliance with a type of compliance requirement of a federal program that is less severe than a material weakness in internal control over compliance, yet important enough to merit attention by those charged with governance. 
-30­
Page 3 
Report on Internal Control over Compliance -(Continued} 
Our consideration of internal control over compliance was for the limited purpose described in the first paragraph of this section and was not designed to identify all deficiencies in internal control over compliance that might be material weaknesses or significant deficiencies$. We did not identify any de:£iciencies in internal control over compliance that we consider to be material weaknesses$. 
Report on schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards Required b_ythe Uniform Guidance 
We have audited the financial statements of Interfai Community Services, Inc.$, as of and for the year ended June 30, 2018, and have issued our report thereon dated November 26, 2018, which contained an ur..modified opinion on those financial statements$. Our audit was conducted for the purpose of forming an opinion on the financial statements as a whole. The accompanying schedule of expenditures of federal awards is presented for purposes of additional analysis as required by the Uniform Guidance and is not a required part of the financial statements$. Such information is the responsibility of management and was derived from and relates direct.ly to the underlying accounting and other records used to prepare the financial statements. The information has been subjected to the auditing procedures applied in the audit of the financial statements and certain additional procedures, including comparing and reconciling such info.rmation directly to the underlying accounting and other records used to prepare the financial statements or to the financial statements themselves, and other additional procedures in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the United States of America. In our opinion, the schedule of expenditures of federal awards is fairlystated in all material respects in relation to the financial statements as a whole$. 
The purpose of this report on internal control over compliance is 
sol.ely to describe the scope of our over compliance and the results of requirements of the Uniform Guidance. not suitable for any othe.r purpose .  testing of internal control that testing based on the Accordingly, this report is  
.o. : a,d'·Gurrera & Associates  
San Diego, California Hovamber 26, 2018  



INC$. 
For the Yea. Ended June 30, 2018 Section I -Summary of Auditor's :Results Financial Statements Types of auditor1s 
financial statements audited were preparedin accordance with GAAl?$: Unmodified 
I.nternal control over financial reporting: 
Material weakness${es) identified? No Significant deficiency(ies) 
No Any noncompliance material to the financial 

Federal Awards Internal control over major programs$: 
• 
Material weakness(es) identified'? No 

• 
Significant deficiency(ies) identified? No 


Type o.f auditor' s report issued on compl.iance for major programs Unmodified Any audit findings disclosed that are required 
to be reported in accordance with Section 200.Sl6(a) No Identification of major programs: 
CFOA Number{s) Name of Fed.ral Program or_Cluster Expendi turas 
64.024 VA Homeless Providers Grant & Per Diem Program $ 1,208,151 93e,e569 CSSG -Family Self-Sufficiency 433 704 Total 
Tota.l of Federal Awards Percentage of Total Expenditures of Federal Awards 
Dollar threshold used to distinguish between type A and type B program $750,000 
Auditee qualified as low-risk auditee under section 520? Yes 


-32­




INTERFAITH COMMUNITY SERVICESN1 INCN. Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs For the Year Ended June 30, 2018 ­
Section II -Current Year Findings 
A. Current Year Findings -Financial Statement Audit No financial statement findings in the current year 
Current Year 
Major Federal Award Progra."!l Audits No Current Year Findings or Questioned Costs 
Section III -Prior Year Findings 
A. Prior Year Findings -Financial Statement Audit No financial statement findings in the prior year. 
B. Prior Year Findings and Questioned Costs -Major 
Federal Award 
Program Audit 
No prior year findings or questioned costsN. 




-33­


INTERFAITH COMMUNITY SERVICES, INCs. Supplementary Information For the Year Ended June , 2018 
CASAWorks Apartments 99-FMTW-010 Statement of Operations For the Year Ended June 30, 2018 
Acct No. FY.2018 
Rent Revenue: $ 
13,998 

5100'1' Total Rent Revenue 
5152N Net Rental Revenues (Rent Revenue Less Vacancies} 

6400T Total Utilities Expenses 

Ooerating and Maintenance Expenses: 6510 Payroll 6515 Supplies 
2,817 6520 Contracts 91 509 6525 Garbage and Trash Removal 31 725 6546 Heating/Cooling Repairs and Maintenance -o-
Vehicle & Maintenance Equipment Operations/Repairs 1,784 
-o-
Utilities Expenses: 6450 Electricity 6451 Water 
6570 
6580 Lease Expense 6590 Misc. Operating and Maintenance Expenses 6500'1' Total Operating and Maintenance Expenses 
Taxes and Insurance: 6710 Real Estate Taxes 6711 Payroll Taxes (Projects' Share) 6720 Property & Liability Insurance 

Worker's Compensation 4,122 6723 Health Insurance & Other Employee Benefits 7,852 6790 Misc. Taxes, Licenses, Permits and Insurance 
9i 
(Hazard) 

6721 Fidelity Bond Insurance 
6722 
5910 5990 5900T SOOOT 
6204 6210 6250 6310 6311 6330 6340 6350 6390 6263T Other Revenues: Laundry and Vending Revenue Misc. Revanue-h"UD Continuum of Care Grant Reim. Total Other Revenue Total Revenue 

Administrative 
Expenses: Management Consultants Advertising and Marketing Other Renting Expenses Office Salaries Office Expenses Manager of Superintendent Sa.laries Legal Expense -ect 
Audit Expense
Misc. Administrative Expenses Total Administrative Expenses $ 1,874 
50,:.830 S 52, 70_4 2 66! 702 

1,501 
-o­
-0­
3,016 
3,007 
12,141 
2,229 
-0­
486 
6700T Total Taxes and Insurance -34­Acct Nos. 
6990 
6990 
6990T 
6000 
5060 
6600 
5060N 
7100T 
3250 
Acct No. 

51000-10 Sl000-20 
Sl000-30 

Sl000-40 
INTERFAITH COMMUNITY SERVICES, INC. Supplementary Information For the Year Ended June 30, 2018 
CASAWorks 
Apartments99-FMTW-010 Statements of Operations ­For the Year Ended June 30s, 2018 

Supportive 
Services Expenses: Salaries -Client Case Management-HUD-Cont.inuum of Care Grant Client Supportive Services Other -Daycare, 

Employment, Life Skills, etc. Total 
Supportive Services Expenses Total. Cost of Operations before Depreciation Profit ) before Depreciation Depreciation Operating Profit {Loss) Net Entity Expenses Change in Total Net Assets from Operations 
Total principal 
payments during audit period. Total of all monthly reserve for replacement deposits. 
Replacement Reserves, or Residual Receipts and Releases which a.re included in expense itemss. Project improvement Reserves which are included 
as expense items, 



FY2018 
$ 17,470 
2,200 . 
19. 670 $ !Hi,640 
.{291938} 
13,966 
.(4 31 904) 
$ -o­
2 .(43,904) 
F'.'i2018 

-o-
Ro­
-0­
-o­
-35­


Sl200-l70 Other Operating Expenses 
S1200-240 Nat Cash Provided (used) by Operating Activities 
Cash Flow from Investing Activities: Sl200-250 Net Deposits to the Reserve for Replacement acct. Sl.200-255 Net Deposits to Other Reserves 
Net Deposits to Residual Receipts account 

31200-260 S1200-330 
-o-
Net Purchases of Fixed Assets -o­
$ 
Sl200-350 Net Cash (used} by Investing Activities -o-
Cash Flow from Financing Activitiess: $1200-360 Principal Paym.ents -Mortgage 81200-420 Distributions 

-0­
-o-

Acct No. 
s1200-010 51200-030 Sl200-050 Sl200-090 s1200-100 Sl200-110 51200-120 S1200-140 S1200-150 
INTERFAITH COMMONITY SERVICES, 
INC. Supplementary Information For the Year Ended June 30 2018 
CASAWorks Apartments 99-FM'l'W-010 Statement of Cash Flows For the Year Ended June 30, 2018 
Cash Flow from Onerating Activities: Rental ReceiptsOther Operating Receipts Administrative Utilities Salaries and WagesOperating and Maintenance Real Estate Taxes Property Insurance Miscellaneous Taxes and Insu.rance 
FY2 01B 
13,s998 52,704 n ,224> (10s,3513) (41s,470) (17s,834) 
(78)
(1s,997) (15 I 479) 


-36­
"\YUL fl<\\, C\Y1 UL 
_:x:Y\-\e,rfa r . 

Contracts Checklist 
/41ication for Funds (revised) /4tract Aroject Work Plan (Attachment A of the contract) 
.eject Budget and Budget Narrative (Attachment B of the contract) 
/4rmative Action Policy 
J.ction 3 Certification **Please Note the contract and the Section 3 Notification require a notarized signature 
.iRs Form W-9 
In addition, the following required documentation must be completed and returned in order to proceed with contract execution: 
/insurance Certificate (as indicated in contract; Insurance Guidelines attached) /4s letter verifying 501 c(3) status /4gency's current list of Board of Directors 
.etterfromBoard designating authorized agent for contract execution /Proof of City of Escondido business license /sylaws 







