GRANT AGREEMENTBETWEEN THE CITY OF SANTEE AND CRISIS HOUSE FOR USE OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT FUNDS FISCAL YEAR 2019-2020 THIS GRANT AGREEMENT ( the `` Agreement '' ) is made and entered into as of this I 0q .. l. , , day-of Jov-IN\ e .. , , , .. 2019 , by and between the CITY OF SANTEE , a California charter city ( `` City '' ) , and Crisis House , a nonprofit organization ( DUNS # 602840407 ) ( `` Subrecipient '' ) . RECITALS WHEREAS , the City , as a recipient under Title l of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 , as amended ( 42 U.S.C . Section 5301 et seq . ) ( the `` Act '' ) , receives an entitlement Community Development Block Grant annually ( `` CDBG funds '' ) from the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development ( `` HUD '' ) ; and WHEREAS , the Subrecipient has submitted an executed application to the City for a grant of funds for program year 2019/2020 which application is dated as January 4 , 2019 , and is incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth herein ( the `` Subrecipient Application '' ) ; and WHEREAS , the City has approved the Subrecipient Application and now desires to make a grant of CDBG funds to the Subrecipient , pursuant to the terms of this Agreement and all applicable provisions of the Act , to carry out the project the Subrecipient described in the Subrecipient Application , which is briefly summarized below under the heading `` Grant Amount and Statement of Work '' ; and WHEREAS , according to federal regulations 24 CFR 570.503 , before disbursing any CDBG funds to a subrecipient , a written agreement shall be signed by the Recipient and subrecipient ; and WHEREAS , the Subrecipient 's participation in the programs funded by the Act complies with all applicable federal laws , regulations and executive orders ; and 60139.00001131296256.1 WHEREAS , any environmental clearances required to be obtained prior to the City 's release of CDBG funds to the Subrecipient , have been obtained . NOW , THEREFORE , in consideration of these recitals , which are hereby fully incorporated into this Agreement , and the mutual covenants contained herein , the City and the Subrecipient agree as follows : 1 . GRANT AMOUNT AND STATEMENT OF WORK A . Scope of Services Program Delivery The City has allocated CDBG funds to the Subrecipient in the maximum aggregate amount of Five Thousand Six Hundred Twenty ( $ 5,620 ) ( `` Grant Funds '' ) to be used for eligible program costs associated with administering a homeless prevention project as further outlined in the Subrecipient Application ( collectively referred to herein as , the `` Services '' ) , and as detailed in Attachment 1 ( the `` Scope of Work '' ) Eligible program costs include program staff salaries and benefits costs . General Administration The administrative offices of the Subrecipient are located at 1034 N. Magnolia Avenue , El Cajon , CA 92020 . General administration services to be performed by the Subrecipient in support of the services noted above and in the Subrecipient Application include , but are not limited to , the preparation of reports and documents required by HUD in connection with CDBG funds . Eligible administrative costs include salaries , wages and related costs of the Subrecipient 's staff for program coordination and implementation . Budget The Subrecipient may request to draw down on the Grant Funds as outlined in Attachment 1 , unless receipts and appropriate documentation can be provided to , and approved by , the City indicating the need to draw down on funds earlier . 2019-2020 CDBG Subrecipient Contract Crisis House Page 2 National Objectives The Subrecipient certifies that the activities carried out with Grant Funds provided by the City to the Subrecipient under this Agreement will meet one or more of the National Objectives set forth at 24 CFR Part 570.208 and incorporated herein by reference to : 1 ) benefit low/moderate income persons , 2 ) aid in the prevention or elimination of slums or blight , or 3 ) meet community development needs having a particular urgency because existing conditions pose a serious and immediate threat to the health or welfare of the community where other financial resources are not available to meet such needs . The Subrecipient will also meet any applicable additional requirements set forth at 24 CFR Part 570.208 ( d ) . B . Performance Monitoring The City will monitor the performance of the Subrecipient against goals and performance standards required herein or by HUD in connection with CDBG funds . Substandard performance , as determined by the City in its sole discretion , will constitute noncompliance with this Agreement . If action to correct such substandard performance is not taken by the Subrecipient within a reasonable period of time , but no later than 90 days , after being notified by the City , the City may suspend any pending disbursements of Grant Funds or may , in its sole discretion , terminate this Agreement in the manner provided herein . 2 . PERIOD OF PERFORMANCE / TERM OF AGREEMENT The Subrecipient shall commence the Services on the 1st day of July 2019 , and shall complete all Services to be reimbursed under this Agreement on or before the 30th day of June 2020 ( the `` Period of Performance '' ) . This Agreement shall expire on the date the City remits the last reimbursement payment to the Subrecipient pursuant to this Agreement or on June 30 , 2020 , whichever is later ( the `` Expiration Date '' ) ; provided that the Subrecipient 's obligation to comply with the provisions of the Act shall remain in effect as long as the Subrecipient shall retain any Program Income ( as defined in Paragraph 4 , below ) or as long as any other obligation of the Subrecipient under the Act remains unfulfilled , at the discretion of HUD or the City . 2019-2020 CDBG Subrecipient Contract Crisis House Page 3 Every effort shall be made by the Subrecipient to expend the allocated funds in their entirety before the conclusion of the Period of Performance . If the Subrecipient does not expend all funds by the end of the Period of Performance , the City will have no further obligation to disburse Grant Funds to the Subrecipient under this Agreement and may reallocate CDBG funds not yet drawn to another eligible project and/or recipient . 3 . DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS The City shall reimburse the Subrecipient with CDBG funds for administrative and program costs related to the provision of the Services for eligible residents/citizens of the City during the Period of Performance . The City has no obligation to reimburse the Subrecipient for Services provided outside the Period of Performance . In addition , the aggregate amount of the reimbursements paid to the Subrecipient shall not exceed the allocated Grant Funds . The Subrecipient shall submit a `` Reimbursement Request '' to the City to request reimbursement for costs related to the provision of the Services . Each Reimbursement Request shall include documentation to verify that the expenditure of funds is consistent with the Subrecipient Application , as approved by the City . Prior to approving a Reimbursement Request , the City will verify that the Subrecipient has met all applicable CDBG regulations . The City shall not provide any payments or reimbursements in advance of actual expenditures by the Subrecipient nor for any expenditures unrelated to the Services . Funding is contingent upon the City receiving its allocation of CDBG funds from HUD . Payroll records , receipts and paid invoices including an itemized statement of all costs are samples of appropriate methods of reimbursement documentation . The Subrecipient may request reimbursements on a quarterly basis after this Agreement is approved by the City Council and until the Expiration Date , or any amended Expiration Date , of this Agreement . 4 . PROGRAM INCOME The Subrecipient shall report to the City any interest or other income earned by the Sub recipient as a direct result of the use of CDBG funds 2019-2020 CDBG Subrecipient Contract Crisis House Page4 I in connection with any activities described in 24 CFR Part 570.500 ( a ) ( 1 ) incorporated herein by reference and attached hereto as , Attachment 2 ( `` Program Income '' ) . All Program Income may be retained by the Subrecipient to be used in connection with the Services . Program Income retained by .the Subrecipient must be expended before additional funds are requested from the City . When the Subrecipient retains Program Income , transfers of CDBG funds from the City to the Subrecipient shall be adjusted according to 24 CFR 570.504 ( b

###

