The Valley of opportunity
􀁶􀁷􀁸 (>o 􀀍 '\.o, :,,Porate􀀲
August 22, 2019
Mr. Harold H. Brown
Chief Executive Officer
East County Transitional Living Center, Inc.
1527 East Main Street
El Cajon, CA 92021
USPS Th. .1NG # 9489 1090 0027 6000 4484 18
INSURANCE<= $500: FOR TRACKING GO TO USPS.COM
Community Development
RE: FY 2019-20 Agreement for Use of CDBG Funds
CFDA No.: 14.218 (Community Development Block Grant)
Dear Pastor Brown:
Enclosed you will find a fully executed copy of East County Transitional Living
Center's agreement for use of CDBG funds for the Installation of Security Fencing
at 1527 East Main Street, for the upcoming program year 2019-2020. The City's
Annual Action Plan· has not yet been approved by HUD and grant agreements
with HUD have not yet been executed. HUD has advised us that subrecipients
may begin to incur costs as of July 1, 2019, but the City will be required to wait
until we have HUD approval and executed grant agreements in place before we
may draw down HUD funds to reimburse your agency.
Further, the City requires additional information on the full scope of work and
costs for the proposed fence before it will authorize notice to proceed for this
project. However, you may begin to seek bids for the project, which bids must
include the provisions for Davis-Bacon- requirements. Please let me know if you
need additional information on the Davis-Bacon requirements.
If you have any questions feel free to contact me at (619) 441-1786. I look
forward to working with you again this year.
Sincerely,
f:)?;
􀁋􀁌􀁍e van Ravesteyn
Housing Manager
Encl.
City ofEI Cajon • 200 Civic Center Way• El Cajon, CA 92020
Planning (619) 441-1742 • Building and Fire Safety (619) 441-1726 • Housing (619) 441-1710
www.cityofelcajon.us
AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE CITY OF EL CAJON AND
East County Transitional Living Center, Inc.
THIS AGREEMENT is made and entered into this / sf day of JV f L( , 2019, by and
between the CITY OF EL CAJON, a municipal corporation, hereinafter referred to as "City," and East County
Transitional Living Center, Inc., a nonprofit organization under the laws of the State of California, hereinafter
referred to as "Subrecipient";
WHEREAS, there exists a need within the City of El Cajon to provide a variety of services, including
housing, recreational, educational, and child care services and developmental programs; and
WHEREAS, the Subrecipient has expressed a desire and has the expertise and experience to operate
the program entitled "Security Fencing at 1527 E. Main Street" in El Cajon; and
WHEREAS, the City has entered into a contract with the United States of America through its Department
of Housing and Urban Development, hereinafter called HUD, to execute the City's Community Development Block
Grant, hereinafter called CDBG, program under the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as
amended, hereinafter called the "Act".
1.
2.
NOW, THEREFORE, IT IS HEREBY MUTUALLY AGREED by and between the parties hereto as follows:
City Review:
The City reserves the right to review and approve actions and decisions taken by the Subrecipient with
respect to the operation of the Security Fencing at 1527 E. Main Street for compliance with all applicable
regulations.
Subrecipient Status:
The City recognizes the Subrecipient as an independent nonprofit organization and agrees to cooperate
in protecting its image as a politically neutral organization.
3. Service Area:
The Service area is City-wide in the City of El Cajon.
4. Scope of Services:
The Subrecipient shall perform all services described in the project description and Scope of Work and
Budget set forth as Exhibit "A" to this Agreement, a copy of which is attached hereto and incorporated
herein by this reference.
5. Time of Performance:
6.
Said services of the Subrecipient are to commence no sooner than July 1, 2019, and shall be completed
no later than June 30, 2020.
Compensation and Method of Payment:
The City shall reimburse the Subrecipient for allowable costs incurred under the scope of the Agreement
and applicable Federal regulations, which have not been paid for or reimbursed in any other manner by
any other Agency or private source of funding. The total of all reimbursements shall not exceed
Twenty Five Thousand and no/100s dollars ($25,000.00).
7. Compliance with Laws and Assurances:
The Subrecipient hereby assures and certifies that it has complied with and will continue to comply with
the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, hereinafter called the Act, and all current and
future applicable federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, regulations, policies, guidelines, and
requirements as they relate to acceptance and use of Federal funds for this federally assisted program.
This Agreement is subject to all such laws, ordinances, regulations, policies, guidelines, and requirements
including without limitation, the Act, Title 24, Code of Federal Regulations, Parts 84, 85 and 200; Title 24,
Code of Federal Regulations, Part 570; Title 29 Code of Federal Regulations, Parts 3 and 5; Title 24 Code
of Federal Regulations Part 70; Public Law 87-581; and applicable Circulars of the U.S. Office of
Management Budget, hereinafter called 0MB, including without limitation, A-87, A-110, A-122, A-128,
and A-133.
1
8. Records Retention:
9.
10.
The Subrecipient shall maintain and retain all financial records, supporting documents, statistical records
and all other records pertaining to the use of the funds provided under this Agreement for a period of four
(4) years at a minimum, and in the event of litigation, claim or audit, the records shall be retained until all
litigation, claims, and audit findings involving the records have been fully resolved. Records for nonexpendable
property acquired with Federal funds provided under this Agreement shall be retained for four
(4) years after the final disposition of such property.
Monitoring:
The City will conduct periodic program monitoring reviews. These reviews will focus on the extent to which
the planned program has been implemented, measurable goals achieved, effectiveness of program
management, and impact of the program. Authorized representatives of the City and HUD shall have the
right of access to all activities and facilities operated by the Subrecipient under this Agreement. Facilities
include all files, records, and other documents related to the performance of this Agreement. Activities
include attendance at staff, board of directors, advisory committee, and advisory board meetings and
inspection by City and HUD representatives, and to ensure that its employees and board members furnish
such information, as in the judgment of City and HUD representatives, may be relevant to the question of
compliance with contractual conditions and HUD directives, or the effectiveness, legality and
achievements of the program.
Program Reporting:
The Subrecipient agrees to prepare and submit financial, program progress, evaluations, and other
reports as required by HUD or the City. The Subrecipient shall maintain such program, property,
personnel, financial and other records and accounts as are considered necessary by HUD or the City to
assure proper accounting for all Contract funds. Sub-recipient shall submit all financial requirements in
Exhibit "B" (Request for Payment forms). All of the Subrecipient's records, with the exception of
confidential client information, shall be made available to representatives of the City and the appropriate
Federal agencies. The Subrecipient is required to submit data necessary to complete the Annual
Subrecipient Performance Report and other federal documents in accordance with HUD regulations and
in the format and at the time designated by the City. Subrecipient shall submit a Periodic Performance
Report (Exhibit "C") for the reporting period (may be either monthly or quarterly, as agreed to with the
City at time of contract execution) by the 10th day of the month following the reporting period. The reports
shall include the following information:
A. Number of individual clients served (individual client may be a person or a household)
B. Race of clients served
C. Ethnicity of clients served (Hispanic, yes or no - a person may be of any race and be Hispanic)
D. Number of disabled clients served (as defined by the Social Security Administrative Guidelines)
E. Whether or not the head of the household is female
F. Number of clients who are low income (per HUD guidelines)
G. Whether or not the client is an El Cajon resident.
H. Number of new clients assisted.
In addition, a brief narrative must accompany the report (Exhibit "C-2"). The narrative should include
(but is not limited to) the following:
A. Outreach methods used;
B. Number and disposition of complaints received; and
C. Progress made toward goals as evidenced in Exhibit "A", or an explanation of lack thereof.
D. Any other accomplishments or problems/concerns the Agency wishes to report.
11. Accounting:
The Subrecipient must establish and maintain on a current basis, an adequate accrual and accounting
system in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and standards. The City, the Federal
Granter Agency, the Comptroller General of the United States, or any of their duly-authorized
representatives, shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of the Subrecipient
2
which directly pertain to the above project for the purpose of audit, examination, excerpts and
transcriptions.
12. Audits:
13.
The Subrecipient is required to arrange for an independent financial and compliance audit annually for
each fiscal year Federal funds are received under this contract. Audits must be in compliance with 0MB
Circular A-133. (Exhibit "F") An audit may be conducted by Federal, State, or local funding source
agencies as part of the City's audit responsibilities. The Subrecipient shall forward a copy of the
independent audit to the City for review within thirty (30) days of its completion. Within thirty (30)
days of the submittal of said audit report, the Subrecipient shall provide a written response to all conditions
or findings reported in said audit report. The response must examine each condition or finding and explain
a proposed resolution, including a schedule for correcting any deficiency. All correction actions related to
conditions or findings shall take place within six (6) months after receipt of the audit report.
The City's authorized representatives shall at all times, have access for the purpose of audit or inspection,
to any and all books, documents, papers, records, property and premises of the Subrecipient.
Subrecipient staff will cooperate fully with authorized auditors when they conduct audits and examinations
of the Subrecipient's program. If indications of misappropriation or misapplication of the funds of this
Agreement cause the City to require a special audit, the cost of the audit will be encumbered and deducted
from the Subrecipient's CDBG award. Should the special audit confirm misappropriation or misapplication
of funds, the Subrecipient shall reimburse the City the amount of the misapplication or misappropriation.
In the event the City uses the judicial system to recover misappropriated or misapplied funds, the
Subrecipient shall reimburse the City for legal fees and court costs in addition to awards.
Beneficiary Qualification:
The Subrecipient agrees to guarantee that at least fifty-one percent (51 %) of the beneficiaries of the
program identified in Exhibit "A," Scope of Work and Budget, are low and moderate income persons or
households. Under the CDBG regulations, the following clienteles are presumed to be low and moderate
income persons and can qualify for service regardless of income: abused children, elderly persons,
battered spouses, homeless persons, disabled persons, illiterate persons, and migrant farm workers.
Beneficiaries qualifying on the basis of income shall have an annual income equal to or less than the HUD
Section 8 (of the United States Housing Act of 1937) Income Limits. HUD Section 8 Income Limits for the
San Diego MSA, define the maximum family income for low and moderate income households. The
Subrecipient is responsible for obtaining the current applicable HUD Section 8 Income Limits for each
year of the Agreement term identified in Paragraph 6, Time of Performance. The Subrecipient shall retain
these forms for three (3) years after conclusion of the Agreement.
14. Assignment:
This Agreement is not assignable by the Subrecipient without the express prior written consent of the City
Council. Consent shall be given at the sole discretion of the City Council. Any attempt by the Subrecipient
to assign any performance of the terms of this Agreement shall be null and void and shall constitute a
material breach of this Agreement upon which the City may, among other remedies, and without limitation,
cancel, terminate, or suspend this Agreement.
15. Termination and Termination Costs:
This Agreement may be terminated in whole or in part at any time by either party upon giving thirty (30)
days written notice to the other party. Agreement must be reached by both parties as to reasons and
conditions for termination in compliance with the provisions of Title 24 Code of Federal Regulations Part
85.44, Termination for Convenience. The City Manager is hereby empowered to give said notice subject
to ratification by the City Council.
The City may immediately terminate this Agreement upon the termination, suspension, discontinuation,
or substantial reduction in CDBG funding for the Contract activity or if for any reason the timely completion
of the work under this Agreement is rendered improbable, infeasible, or impossible. If the Subrecipient
materially fails to comply with any term of this Agreement, the City may take one of more of the actions
provided under 24 CFR Part 85.43, Enforcement, which includes temporarily withholding cash,
disallowing, noncompliance costs, wholly or partially terminating the award, withholding future awards,
and other remedies that are legally available. In such event, the Subrecipient shall be compensated for
all services rendered and all necessarily incurred costs performed in good faith in accordance with the
terms of this Agreement that have been previously reimbursed, to the date of said termination to the extent
that CDBG funds are available from HUD.
3
16.
17.
18.
Program Income:
A Program income defined as that money generated from the CDBG funds received herein, and
shall be retained by the Subrecipient.
B. The Subrecipient shall utilize the program income in accordance with Exhibit "A" and all
provisions of this Agreement shall apply to the disposition of program income.
C. Disposition of program income shall be done in accordance with Paragraph 18 of this Agreement.
Reversion of Assets:
Upon the expiration or termination of this Agreement, for any reason whatsoever, the Subrecipient shall
forthwith transfer to the City, any CDBG funds on hand at the time of such expiration or termination and
any accounts receivable attributable to the use of CDBG funds including without limitation, program
income. Further, any real property under the control of the Subrecipient that was acquired or improved in
whole or in part with CDBG funds in excess of $25,000 shall be: (a) used to meet one of the national
objectives set forth in Title 24 CFR 570.208, or any successor statute, until five (5) years after the
expiration or termination of the Agreement, or for such longer period of time as determined to be
appropriate by the City at its sole discretion; or (b) disposed of in a manner that results in the City's being
reimbursed in the amount of the current fair market value of real property less any portion of the value
attributable to expenditures of non-CDBG funds for acquisition of, or improvement to such real property.
Independent Contractor:
The parties hereto in the performance of this Agreement will be acting in an independent capacity and not
as agents, employees, partners, joint venturers, or associates of one another. The employees or agents
of one party shall not be deemed or construed to be the agent or employees of the other party for any
purpose whatsoever.
19. Insurance:
The Subrecipient shall neither commence work under this Agreement until it has obtained all insurance
required hereunder in a company or companies acceptable to the City nor shall the Subrecipient allow
any subcontractor to commence work on a subcontract until all insurance required of the subcontractor
has been obtained.
The Subrecipient shall agree to provide an acceptable certificate of insurance and endorsements
evidencing the coverage as specified in El Cajon City Council Policy D-3, Insurance Requirements, which
is attached hereto as Exhibit "D" and made a part of this Agreement. All insurance policies shall be
subject to approval by CITY as to form and content.
Subrecipient shall furnish properly executed certificates of insurance to CITY prior to commencement of
services under this Agreement. Such certificate shall:
A Clearly evidence all coverages required above, including specific evidence of a separate
endorsement naming CITY and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and employees
as additionally insureds;
B. Indicate whether coverage provided is on claims-made or occurrence basis;
C. Provide that such insurance shall not be materially changed, terminated, or allowed to expire
except on thirty (30) days prior written notice, via first class mail to CITY; and
D. Subrecipient agrees to provide CITY with copies of all required policies upon request.
Subrecipient shall also maintain Worker's Compensation Insurance (Exhibit "G") with statutory limits,
and employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than $2,000,000 per accident.
20. No Benefit to Arise to Local Employee:
No member, officer, or employee of the City, or its designees or agents, no member of the governing body
of the City, and no other public official who exercises any functions or responsibilities with respect to the
program during his or her tenure or for one year thereafter, shall have any interest, direct or indirect, in
this Agreement or in any contract or subcontract, or the proceeds thereof, for work to be performed in
connection with the program assisted under this Agreement.
21. Certification Regarding Lobbying:
The Subrecipient certifies to the best of their knowledge and belief, that:
4
A No Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid, by or on behalf of the undersigned,
to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any agency, a
Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress in connection with the awarding of any
Federal contract, the making of any cooperative agreement, and the extension, continuation,
renewal, amendment, or modification of any Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative
agreement.
B. If any funds other than Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid to any person
for influencing or attempting to influence any officer or employee of any agency, a Member of
Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or any employee of a Member of Congress in
connection with this Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement, the undersigned
shall complete and submit Standard Form-LLL, "Disclosure Form to Report Lobbying," in
accordance with its instructions.
C. The Subrecipient shall require that the language of this certification be included in the award
documents for all sub-awards at all tiers (including subcontractors, sub-grantees, and contracts
under grants, loans, and cooperative agreements), and that all Subrecipients shall certify and
disclose accordingly.
22. Conflict of Interest:
A Subrecipient covenants that neither it, nor any officer or principal of its firm, has or shall acquire
any interest, directly or indirectly, which would conflict in any manner with the interests of City or
which would in any way hinder Subrecipient's performance of services under this Agreement
Subrecipient further covenants that in the performance of this Agreement, no person having any
such interest shall be employed by it as an officer, employee, agent or subcontractor without the
express written consent of the City Manager. Subrecipient agrees to at all times avoid conflicts of
interest or the appearance of any conflicts of interest with the interests of City in the performance
of this Agreement (also see Exhibit "E").
B. City understands and acknowledges that Subrecipient is, as of the date of execution of this
Agreement, independently involved in the performance of non-related services for other
governmental agencies and private parties. Subrecipient is unaware of any stated position of City
relative to such projects. Any future position of City on such projects shall not be considered a
conflict of interest for purposes of this section.
23. Use of Funds for Entertainment or Gifts:
24.
The Subrecipient certifies and agrees that it will not use funds provided through this Agreement to pay for
entertainment or gifts.
Joint Funding:
For programs in which there are sources of funds in addition to CDBG funds, the Subrecipient shall
provide proof of such funding. The City shall not pay for any services provided by the Subrecipient which
are funded by other sources. All restrictions and/or requirements provided in this Agreement relative to
accounting, budgeting, and reporting applies to the total program regardless of funding sources.
25. Changes in Grant Allocation:
The City reserves the right to reduce the grant allocation when the City's fiscal monitoring indicates that
the Subrecipient's rate of expenditure will result in unspent funds at the end of the program year. Changes
in the grant allocation will be done after consultation with the Subrecipient and approval by the City
Council. Such changes shall be incorporated into this Agreement by written amendments.
26. Fiscal Limitations:
The United States of America through HUD may in the future place programmatic or fiscal limitation(s) on
CDBG funds not presently anticipated. Accordingly, the City reserves the right to revise this Agreement
in order to comply with actions affecting HUD program funding. In the event of funding reduction, the City
may reduce the budget of the Agreement as a whole or as to cost category, and may at its sole discretion,
limit the Subrecipient's authority to commit and spend funds, and may restrict the Subrecipient's use of
both its uncommitted and unspent funds. Where HUD had directed or requested the City to implement a
reduction in funding, with respect to funding for this Agreement, the City Manager or his/her designee
may act for the City in implementing and effecting such a reduction in revising the Agreement for such
purpose. The City Manager or his/her designee may act for the City in suspending the operation of the
5
Agreement for up to sixty (60) days, upon three (3) days written notice to the Subrecipient of his/her
intention to so act. In no event, however, shall any revision made by the City effect expenditures and
legally binding commitments made by the Subrecipient before it received notice of such revision, provided
that such amounts have been committed in good faith and are otherwise allowable and that such
commitments are consistent with HUD cash withdrawal guidelines.
27. Purchase and Invoice Deadlines:
28.
29.
30.
31.
Purchase of equipment or property must be completed before the last three (3) months of the initial
performance period and all equipment bills are to be paid before the last two (2) months of this period. No
expendable or non-expendable property or equipment is to be purchased during the final three (3) months
of the initial performance period unless approved by the City in writing. Invoices for all obligations incurred
under this Agreement must be submitted to the Redevelopment and Housing Department within sixty (60)
days after the initial performance period termination date or they may not be honored. Exceptions to the
preceding limitations require prior written approval by the City.
Invoices will not be honored unless and until periodic reports are current.
Non-expendable Property:
A record shall be maintained by the Subrecipient for each item of non-expendable property acquired with
CDBG funds. This record shall be provided to the City as well as being available for inspection and audit
by the City upon reasonable notice. Non-expendable property means tangible personal property having
a useful life of more than one (1) year and an acquisition cost of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more
per unit. The Subrecipient shall not purchase or agree to purchase non-expendable property without the
prior written approval of the City. Upon completion or early termination of this Agreement, the City reserves
the right to determine the final disposition of said non-expendable property acquired for this program and
CDBG funds in compliance with applicable laws and regulations. Disposition may include, but is not limited
to, the City taking possession of said non-expendable property.
Expendable Personal Property:
Expendable personal property refers to all tangible personal property other than non-expendable personal
property. The Subrecipient shall not purchase or agree to purchase expendable personal property with a
unit value of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more per unit without the prior written approval of the
City.
Purchase or Lease of Non-Expendable Property or Equipment:
The Subrecipient shall obtain three documented bids prior to purchasing or leasing any non-expendable
personal property or equipment over one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in unit value. The Subrecipient
shall purchase or lease from the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. This inventory shall be
provided to the City as well as being available for inspection and audit upon reasonable notice at the
request of the City.
Travel and Conference Restrictions:
The Subrecipient certifies and agrees that travel and conference expenses will not be paid for by funds
provided through this Agreement.
32. Affirmative Action Policy:
The Subrecipient shall make a "good faith" effort to ensure that all projects funded wholly or in part by
CDBG funds shall provide equal employment and career advancement opportunities for minorities and
women. A "good faith" effort includes, but is not limited to, advertising in one or more minority or women's
publications; direct solicitations; and requesting assistance from minority and women community
organizations, contractor groups, local state or federal minority and women business assistance office or
other organizations that provide assistance to in the recruitment and placement of minorities and women.
In addition, the Subrecipient shall make every effort to employ residents of the area and shall keep a
record of the positions that have been created directly or as a result of this program.
A. Provision of Program Services
(1) The Subrecipient shall not on the ground of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual
orientation, disability or familial status exclude any person from participation in, deny any
person the benefits of, or subject any person to discrimination under any program or
activity funded in whole or in part with CDBG funds.
6
(2) The Subrecipient shall not under any program or activity funded in whole or in part with
CDBG funds, on the ground of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation,
disability, or familial status:
(a) Deny any facilities, services, financial aid or other benefits provided under the
program or activity.
(b) Provide any facilities, services, financial aid or other benefits which are different
or are provided in a different form from that provided to others under the program
or activity.
(c) Subject to segregated or separate treatment in any facility in, or in any manner
or process related to receipt of any service or benefit under the program or
activity.
(d) Restrict in any way access to, or in the enjoyment of any advantage or privilege
enjoyed by others in connection with facilities, services, financial aid, or other
benefits under the program or activity.
(e) Treat an individual differently from others in determining whether the individual
satisfies any admission, enrollment, eligibility, membership, or other requirement
or condition, which the individual must meet in order to be provided any facilities,
services, or other benefit provided under the program or activity.
(f) Deny an opportunity to participate in a program or activity as an employee.
(3) The Subrecipient may not utilize criteria or methods of administration which have the
effect of subjecting individuals to discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin,
sex, sexual orientation, disability, or familial status or have the effect of defeating or
substantially impairing accomplishment of the objectives of the program or activity with
respect to individuals of a particular race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation,
disability, or familial status.
(4) The Subrecipient, in determining the site or location of housing or facilities provided in
whole or in part with CDBG funds, may not make the selections of such site or location
which have the effect of excluding individuals from, denying them the benefits of, or
subjecting them to discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual
orientation, disability, or familial status or which have the purpose or the effect of
defeating or substantially impairing the accomplishment of the objectives of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 and amendments thereto.
(5) (a) In administering a program or activity funded in whole or in part with CDBG funds
regarding which the Subrecipient has previously discriminated against persons
on the grounds of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability,
or familial status, the Subrecipient must take affirmative actions to overcome the
effects of prior discrimination.
(b) Even in the absence of such prior discrimination the Subrecipient, in
administering a program or activity funded in whole in part with CDBG funds,
should take affirmative action to overcome the effects of conditions which would
otherwise result in limiting participation by persons of a particular race, color,
national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or familial status. Where
previous discriminatory practice or usage tends, on the grounds of race, color,
national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or familial status, to exclude
individuals from participation in, to deny them the benefits or, or to subject them
to discrimination under any program or activity to which CDBG funding applies,
the Subrecipient has an obligation to take reasonable action to remove or
overcome the consequences of the prior discriminatory practice or usage, and to
accomplish the purpose of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and amendments thereto.
(c) The Subrecipient shall not be prohibited by this part from taking any eligible
action to ameliorate an imbalance in services or facilities provided to any
geographic area or specific group of persons within its jurisdiction where the
purpose of such action is to overcome prior discriminatory practice or usage.
7
B.
(6) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in Sections A(1 )-(5), nothing contained herein
shall be construed to prohibit the Subrecipient from maintaining or constructing separate
living facilities or rest room facilities for the different sexes. Furthermore, selection on the
basis of sex is not prohibited when institutional or custodial services can properly be
performed only by a member of the same sex as the recipients of the services.
Employment Discrimination
(1) The Subrecipient shall not discriminate against any employee or applicant for
employment because of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or
familial status. The Subrecipient shall take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are
employed, and that employees are treated, during employment, without regard to their
race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or familial status. Such
action shall include, but not be limited to, the following: employment, upgrading, demotion
or transfer, recruitment or recruitment advertising, layoff or termination, rate of pay or
other forms of compensation and selection for training including apprenticeship. The
Subrecipient agrees to post in a conspicuous place available to employees and
applicants for employment, notices setting forth the provisions of this nondiscrimination
clause.
(2) The Subrecipient shall, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by or
on behalf of the Subrecipient, state that all qualified applicants will receive consideration
for employment without regards to race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation,
disability, or familial status.
(3) The Subrecipient shall send to each labor union or representative of workers with whom
it has a collective bargaining agreement or other contract or understanding, a notice to
be provided by the City's contracting officers advising the labor union or workers'
representative of the Subrecipient's commitments under Section 202 of Executive Order
No. 11246 of September 24, 1965, and shall post copies of the notice in conspicuous
places available to employees and applicants for employment.
(4) The Subrecipient shall comply with all provisions of Executive Order 11246 of September
24, 1965, and of the rules, regulations, and relevant orders of the Secretary of Labor.
(5) The Subrecipient shall furnish to the City all information and reports required by Executive
Order No. 11246 of September 24, 1965, and by the related rules, regulations, and
orders.
(6) In the event of the Subrecipient's failure to comply with any rules, regulations, or orders
required to be complied with pursuant to this Agreement, the City may cancel, terminate,
or suspend in whole or in part its performance and the Subrecipient may be declared
ineligible for further government contracts in accordance with the procedures authorized
in Executive Order No. 11246 of September 24, 1965, or by rule, regulation, or order of
the Secretary of Labor, or as otherwise provided by law.
(7) The Subrecipient shall include the provisions of the "Affirmative Action Policy,"
Paragraphs 8.(1) through (6), above, in every subcontract or purchase order unless
exempted by rules, regulations, or order of the Secretary of Labor, issued pursuant to
Section 204 of Executive Order No. 11246 of September 24, 1965, so that such
provisions will be binding upon each subcontractor or vendor.
The Subrecipient shall take such action with respect to any subcontract or purchase order
as the City may direct as a means of enforcing such provisions including sanctions for
noncompliance; provided, however, that in the event the Subrecipient becomes involved
in, or is threatened with, litigation with a subcontractor or vendor as a result of such
direction by the City, the Subrecipient may request the United States to enter into such
litigation to protect the interests of the United States.
(8) The Subrecipient shall not discriminate on the basis of age in violation of any provision
of the Age Discrimination Act of 1975 (42 U.S.C. 6101 et seq.) or with respect to any
otherwise qualified disabled individual as provided in Section 504 of the Rehabilitation
Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794). The Subrecipient shall also provide ready access to and use
of all CDBG funds assisted buildings to physically disabled persons in compliance with
8
the standards established in the Architectural Barriers Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. 4151 et
seq.) and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1992.
33. Religious Proselytizing or Political Activities:
34.
The Subrecipient agrees that it will not perform or permit any religious proselytizing or political activities
in connection with the performance of this Agreement. Funds under this agreement will be used
exclusively for performance of the services required under this Agreement and no funds shall be used to
promote any religious or political activities. Further in accordance with 24 CFR 570.200U), et. seq., the
Subrecipient shall not:
A. Engage in inherently religious activities, such as worship, religious instruction, or proselytization,
as part of the programs or services funded under this part. If an organization conducts such
activities, the activities must be offered separately, in time or location, from the programs or
services funded under this part, and participation must be voluntary for the beneficiaries of the
HUD-funded programs or services;
B. Use direct CDBG funds to support any inherently religious activities, such as worship, religious
instruction, or proselytization;
C. Discriminate against a program beneficiary or prospective program beneficiary on the basis of
religion or religious beliefs;
D. Use CDBG funds for the acquisition, construction, or rehabilitation of structures to the extent that
those structures are used for inherently religious activities,
Faith Based Organizations:
Notwithstanding Paragraph 33 above, if Subrecipient is a Faith Based Organization, Subrecipient agrees
to abide by Executive Order 13279, as promulgated at 24 CFR 5.109, et. seq.
35. Alterations, Encumbrances. Mechanics' Liens:
The Subrecipient agrees that it will not make, or suffer to be made, any alterations to the CDBG funded
improvements, the property or any part thereof, without the prior written consent of the City. The
Subrecipient shall keep the property free from any encumbrances or liens arising out of any work
performed, material furnished, or obligations incurred by the Subrecipient. The Subrecipient agrees to
submit performance, and labor and materials bonds on any improvements over $5,000.00.
36. Notices:
All notices, memoranda, reports, drafts, and communications shall be served in writing. The notices shall
be sent to the following addresses.
City
Community Development - Housing
City of El Cajon
200 Civic Center Way
El Cajon, CA 92020
9
Subrecipient
East County Transitional Living Center,
Inc.
Attn: Harold H. Brown,
Chief Executive Officer
1527 East Main Street
El Cajon, CA 92021
37. Amendments: Variations:
38.
39.
This writing with attachments embodies the whole of the Agreement of the parties hereto. There are no
oral Agreements not contained herein, except as herein provided, addition or variation of the terms of this
Agreement shall not be valid unless made in the form of a written amendment to the Agreement formally
approved and executed by the City Council.
Savings Clause:
If any provision of this Agreement is found to be invalid, void, or unenforceable, the remaining provisions
shall, insofar as reasonably possible, continue in full force in effect without being impaired or invalidated
in any way.
Exhibit(s):
The Exhibits to this Agreement are an integral part of this Agreement and have each been incorporated
herein.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have caused this Agreement to be executed as of the day and year first
written above.
Graham Mitchell, City Manager
By
Harold H. Brown
Chief Executive Officer
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
1 0
EXHIBIT "A"
SCOPE OF WORK AND BUDGET
Project: Security Fencing at 1527 E. Main Street
Contact Person: Harold H. Brown, Chief Executive Officer (619-442-0457)
Statement of Work: The Subrecipient agrees to use the Community Development Block Grant funds
allocated by the City for Fiscal Year 2019-2020 to provide the Security Fencing at 1527 E. Main Street
Program/Project in the City of El Cajon.
Section 1 - Work Description:
(To be completed by Subrecipient-must reflect work activities approved by City Council)
fu.􀀉 􀀋it c,-.---.d 􀀊 sto.£..e fffk-"=JC 􀀑g.,􀀒 zso ' 􀀂± ,c [p 1
.. e, 􀀋
Section 2 - Records and Reporting
The Subrecipient shall submit a Periodic Performance Report, which shall become Exhibit "C" hereto, for the
previous reporting period. Reporting periods may be monthly or quarterly, at the Subrecipient's option, but must
remain consistent throughout the year. Periodic Performance Reports are due by the 10th of the month following
the reporting period. These reports shall include the following information:
A. Number of individual clients served (individual client may be a person or a household)
B. Race of clients served
C. Ethnicity of clients served (Hispanic, yes or no - a person may be of any race and be Hispanic)
D. Number of disabled clients served (as defined by the Social Security Administrative Guidelines)
E. Whether or not the head of the household is female
F. Number of clients who are low income (per HUD guidelines)
G. Whether or not the client is an El Cajon resident.
H. Number of new clients assisted.
In addition, a brief narrative (Exhibit "C-2") must accompany the report. Narrative should include (but is not
limited to) the following:
A. Progress and status of the capital/public facility project;
B. Progress made toward goals as evidenced in Exhibit "A", or an explanation of lack thereof.
C. Any other accomplishments or problems/concerns the Agency wishes to report.
Section 3 - Go a Ti ·ne a ition, East County Transitional Living Center, Inc. will
provide 􀃞 ...::.lCl,:./>.,.e..-..M􀃟􀃠􀃡􀃢􀃣􀃤=l􀃥-􀃦􀃧==--------- 􀃨􀃩􀃪 · · · ith
services in the
Section 4 - Budget
The City agrees to pay Subrecipient a total sum of Twenty Five Thousand and no/100s ($25,000.00) to assist
in the completion of improvements and provision of the above mentioned services. It is further agreed that no
funding shall be disbursed unless the Subrecipient is in full compliance with the provisions of this Agreement.
The City shall make payment of these funds on a reimbursement basis contingent upon a written request and
submittal of receipts or appropriate proof of payment from the Subrecipient. Payments will not be paid unless
and until periodic reports are current. Payments may be made on a monthly or quarterly basis, at the
Subrecipient's option.
EXHIBIT "A-2"
ACQUIS ITION/CONSTRUCTION/REHABILITATION PROGRAM BUDGET
PROJ ECT TITLE / Security Fencing at 1527 E. Main Street
This schedule must be completed when the proposed capital project involves acquisition, construction and/or
rehabilitation of a public facility. The project budget should include permits, utility installation, relocation and
engineering and architectural services (if applicable). City Department applicants must ensure the matching
funds are earmarked in their departmental budget. Exhibit B must be completed to document the sources of
matching funds and gap financing.
MATCHING FUNDS
Cost Component CDBG Funding Other Cash In-kind Total Project
Request Resources Contributions Budget
LAND
Appraisals
Legal Services
Land Acquisition
Real Estate Services
Other (specify)
Total Land Cost
PROFESSIONAL
S E RVICES
Architects (Required)
Asbestos Survey
(Required)
Archeological
MonitorinQ
Other (Specify)
Total Professional
Services
Construction
Site Improvements
Labor5 q ooo -
Material \LA ono -
Equipment6
Fees and Permits7
Total Construction
Costs ?-5 ooo
Relocation
Assistance8
TOTAL PROJECT
B U DGET is , o r::, O
5 Davis-Bacon Wage Regulations will affect Construction/Rehabilitation project costs. Check with staff for wage determination.
6 Attach list itemizing proposed acquisition of built in equipment. Equipment that is not an integral structural fixture is generally not
eligible for purchase with CDBG funds.
7 Include costs for development and permit fees payable to the City of El Cajon in connection with a project.
8 Relocation costs apply when i ndividuals or busi n!c)sses are displaced as res ult of your acquisition, new construction or
renovation project. Please check with staff for relocation cost factors.
EXHIBIT "B"
FY2019-2020 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT PROGRAM
REQUEST FOR PAYMENT
**NOTE: To request Electronic Versiou of this form, send an e-mail to jkasviki@cityofelcajon.us This R􀁹quest for Payment is presented to the City of El Cajon to obtain reimbursement for the operation of the Project named below for the Payment Period listed below. The payment is
requested for the portion of the contract budget stated in Column B.
SUBRECIPIENT East County Transitional Living Center Inc
PAYMENT PERIOD
PREPARED BY
li'Y'2019-20
Job Title
Job Title
Job Title
Salaries & Wages
Payroll Taxes
Fringe Benefits
PERSONNEL
Office Suplies
Postage
Rent and Utilities
Telephone
Other
Other
Other
Other
Other-Fencing
NON-PERSONNEL
$0
$25,000
$25,000
ITOTAL PROGRAM I $25,000
Ivan Andujar
$0.00 $0.00
$0.00 $0.00
$0.00 $0.00
$0.00 $0.00
$0.00 $0.00
$0.00 $0.00
$0.00 $0.00
$0.00 $0.00
$0.00 $0.00
$0.00 $0.00
$0.00 $0.00
$0.00 $0.00
$0.00 $0.00
$0.00 $0.00
$0.00 $0.00
$0.00 $25,000.00
$0.00 $25,000.00
$0.00 I $2s,ooo.oo
Name
JUL
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
AUG
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
PROJECT Security Fencing at 1527 E. Main St. -FY 2019-20
TOTAL PAYMENT ---------
OCT
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
(619) 749-6413
Phone
NOV
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
DEC
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00 1 $0.00 1 $0.00 1 $0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00 $0.00
$0.00 $0.00
$0.00 $0.00
$0.00 I $0.00
$0.00 $0.00
$0.00 $0.00
$0.00 $0.00
$0.00 $0.00
I hereby certify the above expenditures were incurred in carrying out the objective of the project contract, are authorized in the approved contract budget, and that contracted services were
performed in accordance with the Agreement.
Date Signature & Title of Subrecipient Executive
.-
C ITY OF E L CAJON
COMMUN, DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT Pt 3RAM
PERIODIC PERFORMANCE REPORT
EXHIBIT "C"
FY Period Reported: ___F.... Y... .2 0 1_ 9_ -_ 2_ 0_2 _ 0 ______ Quarter/Month Reported: ______________
Agency Name: East County Transitional Living Center Inc
Program Name: Security Fencing 1 527 E. Main St. - FY 2019-20
Reporter's Name: Ivan Andujar
Phone Number: (619) 749-6413
Numbers served must reflect number of Persons (P) served. Number of Households (H) served may only be reported with prior
approval of the Redevelopment & Housing Division.
Please indicate (P) or (H) :
1 . TOTAL
White
Black / African American
Asian
American Indian / Alaskan
Native
Native Hawaiian / Other
Pacific Islander
American Indian / Alaskan
Native and White
Asian and White
Black / African American
and White
American Indian / Alaskan
Native & Black / African
American
Other/Multi-Racial
2. TOTAL
Extremely Low Income
(0-30% MFI)
Low Income
(>30-50% MFI)
Moderate Income
(>50-80% MFI)
Income above 80% MFI
3. TOTAL
Homeless
Female Headed Households
Disabled/Special Needs
(P)
(A)
Number of Persons
served with El Cajon's
CDBG funding this
Quarter/Month
Total # Each Race
Annual City Grant Amount: $100,000
(B) (C)
How many in Column Cumulative number of
(D}
(A) reported as Persons served How many in Column
H ispanic (this Year-To-Date (C) reported as
Quarter/Month for Each (July 1 to end of
Race)? current report period)
Hispanic Year-To-Date?
Total # of Hispanics Total # Each Race Total # of Hispanics
Each Race Year-to-Date Each Race Year-to-Date
IMPORTANT-PLEASE NOTE: 1) Hispanic is no longer considered a race, but an ethnicity and must be reported separately. A
member of any race must also report as Hispanic or Non-Hispanic. "Other" is for multi-racial reports only and must be identified in
the narrative report. 2) Totals for lines 1. 2, and 3 must match each other for each column. 3) List only unduplicated program
participants-clients receiving continued services from previous fiscal year may be counted only once during the new contract year.
4) A narrative report must accompany this form. The narrative should include the definition of "Persons Served" (typically El Cajon
residents) and should reflect all additional data collected as agreed in the contract such as Number of Families served, Number of
Projects Completed, Number of Program Hours provided, Number of Bed Nights provided, or other Performance O utcome
Measurements. For questions; please call the Housing Division at (619) 441-1786.
· ·
Rev. 06/13/2014 c:\users\ivan_a\desktop\cbdg-bud progrnms\emer. housing fy 2018-19\exhibit c - periodic program report_l8-19.doc
CDBG LOW "lfPD CLIENTELE NATIONAL OBJECTIVF· 􀂞PORT
FEDERAL FISCAL YEAR 2019-2020
PROJECT STATUS NARRATIVE
EXHIBIT "C-2"
The purpose of this form is to report accomplishment data for the project named below. This form must be completed for projects providing
eligible CDBG/HOME activities to Low to Moderate Income residents of the City of EI Cajon. This form must be completed and submitted
with each monthly/quarterly Periodic Pe1formance Report.
AGENCY NAME:
PROJECT NAME:
REPORTING PERIOD:
PREPARED BY:
PROJECT STATUS:
East County Transitional Living Center Inc
Security Fencing at 1 527 E. Main St. FY 2019-20
Ivan Andujar
NAME
Pending D Active D
PROJECT STATUS NARRATNE:
PHONE
Complete D Date:
S U BJ ECT :
RE F E RE NC E :
P U RPOSE
C ITY OF EL CAJ O N
C ITY C O U N C I L P O L I CY
I n s u ra n ce Requ i rements
Adopted 7/26/94
Ame nded 1 1 /29/05
Amended 04/1 4/1 5
EXH I B IT D
POLICY
D-3
E F FECTIVE PAG E
04/1 4/1 5 1 of 8
To provide a u n iform C ity policy for liability insura nce req u irements a nd to esta blish procedu res for
its con sistent appl icatio n .
BACKGRO U N D
T o hel p p rotect the C ity against liabi lity, a l l ind ivid u a ls, contractors , agencies and org a n izations
cond u cti n g b u s i ness i n a ssociation with , o n be h a lf of, or in certa i n circu msta n ces within the City of
El Cajon a re req u i red to m a intain adeq u ate liability i n s u ra n ce coverage a ccepta ble to the C ity.
B eca u se of the differin g levels of p rotection n eeded for various activities conducted within the City,
t h e City has esta b lish ed policy limits a n d sta n d a rd s which d irectly relate to the type of activity
b eing con d u cted .
POLICY
A l l ind ivid uals, contractors , agencies, and o rg a n izatio n s conducting busi n ess either for the C ity of
E l Caj o n (or the S u ccessor Age n cy to the El C ajon Redevelopment Age n cy) or p u rsuant to a n
o rd ina nce, resolution , a g reement o r policy req u iring the maintenance o f liability insura n ce s h a l l
p rovide p roof of liabi lity i n s u rance in th e fol lowin g amou nts and writte n o n a n occurrence basis
(claims made coverage will be accepted o n ly after verifying that occu rrence coverage is not
availa ble) :
1 . A com bined s i n g l e limit policy with aggregate limits in the amount of $2 mil l ion for all
co nstruction p rojects and for carnivals, s u bdivisions, and poll ution coverage subject to
section 5 . c . under the heading " I N S U RA N C E STAN DAR D S , " with a m?ximum deductible
or self-in s u ra n ce rete ntion ("S I R") of $500,000; for policies n ot h aving a "combined single
l i m it," m i n i m u m l i m its i n amou nts as fo llows:
Com mercial G e n e ral Liabi lity (CG L) : I n s u ra n ce Services Office Form CG 00 01 cove ring
CGL on a n "occu rrence" basis, including p rod u cts and com pleted operation s , p roperty
dam age, bodily i nj u ry and personal & advertisi n g inj u ry with l i m its n o less than $ 1 ,000,000
per occu rrence. If a general aggregate limit applies, either th e general agg regate limit shall
a pply sepa rate ly to this p roject/location o r the general aggregate limit shall be twice the
req u i red occu rre n ce lim it.
U n less staff d etermines that circu msta n ces (i.e. h i g h risk project, etc. ) require the h ig her
limit, the $2 ,00 0 , 000 limit shall be decreased to $ 1 ,000,000 with a maxi m u m ded u ctible o r
S I R of $ 1 50,000 , wh e n :
S U BJ ECT :
REFEREN C E :
C I TY O F E L CAJ O N
C I TY COUNC I L P O L I CY
I n s u ra n ce Req u i reme nts
Adopted 7 /26/94
Ame nded 1 1 /29/05
Ame nded 04/1 4/1 5
POLICY
D-3
E F FECTIVE PAG E
04/1 4/1 5 2 of 8
a. The pu b l ic i m p rovements portion of a s u b d ivision project is less than $50, 000; or
b. A construction p roject (in accorda n ce w ith the Standard S pecifications for Public
Works C o n structio n-and the Standard Special P rovisions, the "Green Book") is for
less than $50,000.
2. Exce pt as othe rwise p rovided i n this poli cy, a com bined s in g le limit pol icy with agg regate
lim its in the amount of $2 m i llion fo r all others , includ i n g , b ut not l i m ited to , ath letic leagues,
recreation g ro u ps , towing compan ies and p u b l i c service agencies; for policies not h aving a
"c ombined single limit," minimum limits in amou nts as fo llows:
Commercial G e n e ra l Liability ( C G L) : I n s u ra n ce S e rvices Office Form CG 00 0 1 covering
CGL on an "occu rren ce" basis, including p rod u cts and com p leted operatio n s , p roperty
damage, bodily i nj u ry a n d personal & advertis ing i nj u ry with l im its no less than $ 1 ,000, 000
per o ccu rrence. I f a g e neral agg regate l i m it a p plies, either the general aggreg ate limit shall
apply separate ly to t h is p roject/location or the general aggregate limit shall be twice the
req u i red occu rre n ce l imit.
3. A co m b i ned single l i m it pol icy with agg regate l i m its i n the amount of $250,000 for
homeowners i n s u ra n ce or $50 0 , 000 for co mmercial gen eral liability insura n c e for small
business owners , i n either eve nt o n ly where the i n s u rance is req u ired for work i n the p u blic
rig ht-of-way. " S m a l l b u s i n ess owne rs" are defined as commercia l busin esses, o r a
professional or a d m i n i strative office uses, where the owners of the b u s i ness work on-s ite
as their p rimary calling or vocatio n , and having no more th an two (2) employees not related
by blood or marriag e .
4 . S e lected h ig h -risk a ctivities that would otherwise fal l under t h e criteria for category 2 s h a l l
b e evalu ated by staff o n a case-by-case basis t o determine whether or n ot the a bove l i mits
are s ufficie nt. The i m p o sition of liabi lity l i m its exceed i ng $2 m il l ion for such h ig h - risk
activities is a p pealable to the C ity Council.
5 . $ 1 ,000, 000 for taxica b compan ie s .
6 . $500 ,000 or act u a l value, whi ch ever is g reater, fo r "va luable papers" and " i n tra n sit"
i n sura n ce where C ity records or personal property is bein g tra n s ported or stored outside of
C ity p roperty.
EXHIBIT D
S U BJ E CT :
REFE RENC E :
C I TY O F E L CAJ O N
C I TY C O U N C I L P O L I C Y
I n s u ra n ce Req u i reme nts
Ad o pted 7/26/94
Ame nded 1 1 /29/05
Amended 04/1 4/1 5
P O L I CY
D-3
E F F ECTIVE PAG E
04/1 4/1 5 3 of 8
7 . Exceptions to the a bove l i m its m a y b e made fo r n o n -p rofit, c h a ritable, political , com m u n ity
and rel i g ious o rg a n izations.
8 . The policy o r pol icies o f i n s u ra nce may b e for a l l operations o r activities of the party
p u rchasing the policy or policies p rovide d , h owever, that the C ity or the Successor Age n cy
m ay req uire a separate pol icy exclus ively for o perations of the p u rchaser where the C ity
M a na g e r, in h is or h e r sole discretion, determi nes that a single policy wo u ld be inadeq u ate
to p rotect the City or S u ccessor Age n cy in the eve nt of mu ltiple catastrophes .
9 . Workers' compensation i n s u ra nce s h a l l meet the m i n i m u m lim its req u i red b y law.
I NSURAN C E STAN DARDS
1 . ADM I TT E D CARR I E R / B EST'S RAT I N G A , C LASS VII
a . I n s u rers mu st be "admitted" ca rriers p u rsuant t o the p rovisions of the C a l ifo rn i a
I n su ra n ce C o d e and in a ccord a n ce with a l l requ i rements o f t h e State I n s u ra n ce
Commiss ion and m ust be listed in the:
" O F F I C IAL P U B L ICAT I O N
D E PARTME NT O F I N S U RA N C E
STATE O F CAL I F O R NIA
45 F remont Street
San F ra ncisco , Califo rn ia 941 05
I N S U RA N C E O R GAN IZAT I O N S AUTHOR IZED BY THE I N S U RA N C E
COMM I S S I O N T O TRANSACT B U S I N ESS O F I NS U RANCE
IN THE STATE O F CAL I FO R N IA D U R I N G
[the most recent year for wh ich
the p u b l ication is availa ble]."
or
"California Department of I n s u rance Comp a ny Profile."
S U BJ ECT :
C ITY O F E L CAJ O N
C I TY C O U N C I L POLICY
I n s u ra n ce Req u i rements
EXHI BIT D
P O L I C Y
D-3
REFEREN C E : Ado pted 7/26/94 E F FECTIVE PAG E
Amended 1 1 /29/05
Amen ded 04/1 4/1 5 04/1 4/1 5 4 of 8
b. I n s u re rs m ust have a Best's rati ng of A, Class VII or h ig h e r (th is rating i n cludes
those i n s u rers with a m i n i m u m policyholder's surp lus of $50 to $ 1 00 millio n ) .
Exceptions t o t h e Best's rati n g may be co nsidered wh e n a n insurance carrie r meets
a l l othe r standards a n d c a n satisfy s u rplus amou nts equ iva lent to an A, C lass VI I
rating. An exceptio n to the rating req u i rement may be made fo r the California State
C o m pe n sation I n s u ra n ce F u n d if not rated.
2 . N O N -AD M I TT E D CAR R I E R / B EST'S RAT I N G A , C lass XI I
Exce ptions to the "admitted" req u i rement may be co nsidered when a n o n -adm itted
i n s u ra nce carrier meets a l l othe r sta n d a rds herein and:
a. is either (i) listed i n :
Califo rn ia Department o f Insura n ce
L ist of A p p roved S u rplus Line I n s u rers
L I S T I N G O F F I L I N GS
or (ii) is cu rrently a p a rty to co-operation agreeme nts with foreign i n s u ra n ce
reg u latory authorities acceptab le to the C ity Manager o r C ity Attorney (fo r exam ple,
for i n s u rers located i n the U n ited Kingdom, agreements must be with both the
Prudential Regu latory Authority ("PRA") and the Financial Conduct Authority ("FCA") ,
or s u ch s u ccessor auth o rity or autho rities of P RA and FCA ;
b. e ither t h e carrier o r its p a re n t company has a Best's rating of A, C lass VI I (th is rating
i n clude those insurers with a m i n i m u m policyholder's s u rp l u s of $50 to $ 1 00 million ;
c. h as te n years or more experie n ce in the busi ness of i n s u rance ; a nd
d . if ap plica b le, t h e re insura nce carrier h a s a q u a lified rati n g .
3 . G E N E RAL - I NS U RANCE C E RT I F I CATE S / ADD ITI ONAL I N S U R E D
A l l i n s u rers ( i n cluding those i n s u ring aga inst pollution o r d ischarges o f hazard o u s
materials) m u s t p rovide certificates of i n s u rance a n d endorsements evidencing cove rage
p rior to the sta rt of any co ntract. All certificates or endorsements must i ncl ude :
S U BJ E CT :
C ITY O F E L CAJ O N
C I TY C O U N C I L P O L I CY
I n s u ra n ce Req u i reme nts
EXH I B IT D
POLICY
D-3
REFEREN C E : Ado pted 7 /26/94 EFF ECTIVE PAG E
Ame n d ed 1 1 /29/05
Ame n ded 04/1 4/1 5
• N a me of i n s u ra n ce com pany iss u i n g each po licy.
04/1 4/1 5 5 of 8
All i n s u re rs m u st p rovid e a n orig i n a l e n d o rs ement naming the C ity of El Cajon
(a nd/or the S u ccessor Age n cy to the El Caj o n R ed evelopment Ag e n cy) , and its
(th e i r) elected and appo inted officia ls , officers, e m ployees and vo l u nte e rs (fo r
p u rposes of this P o l icy, i n d ivid u a l ly a n d c o l lective l y , t h e " C ity I n s u re d s") a s
a d d itio n a l i n s u re d s . T h i s i n c l u s i o n a s add itional ins u reds shall n o t b e req u ired of
Workers' Compensation or professional l i a b i l ity policies of insu ra n ce , a n d may be
waived for "va lu a b l e pape rs" coverage with t h e approval of the C ity Atto rney.
• All i n s u rers must p rovide a n orig i n a l e n d o rsement stating that the i n s u ra n ce
cove rag e s h a l l be primary i n s u ra nce as respects the City of E l Caj o n (and/or the
S u ccessor Ag e n cy to t h e E l Caj o n R edevelopment Ag ency), a n d its (th e i r) e lected
a nd appoi nted official s , officers , e m ployees a nd vol u nteers (for p u rposes of t h is
Policy, i n d ivid ua lly a n d collectively, the "C ity Ins u red s . Any ins u ra n ce o r selfi
n s u ra n ce maintained by t h e Entity, its office rs , officia ls, employees , or vol u nte e rs
s h a l l be excess of the C o ntractor's i n s u ra n ce and s h a l l not con tribute with it.
• Waive r of S u b rogation e n d o rsement is req u ired on Workers' Compensation.
C overage.
• Ad d ress of named i n s u re d .
• Description of cove rag e , including a ny s pe cia l coverage req uired by t h e contract.
• P o licy n u mbers.
• Policy periods (If c l ai m s made basis, m ust in clude retroactive date a n d length of
time a l l owed as exte n d ed reporting pe riod ) .
• C overag e type (occurre n ce form vs. claims m ade) .
• Auth orized sig nature a n d d ate of issuance, An orig i n a l signatu re is req u ired : a
d igita l signature is accepta ble so long as it complies with the req u i reme nts of
Gove rn ment Code § 1 6 . 5 .
• U n less approved by t h e C ity M a nager or designee , no certificate s h a l l b e accepted
that q ua l ifies the obl igatio n of the carrier to provide 30 days writte n notice of
cancel lation of th e policy. With the approval of th e C ity Attorney the o b l igation to
p rovide notice of ca n ce llation may b e red u ced to ten ( 1 0) d ays , but o n ly for
te rmin ation d u e to the n o n-payment of a n y p re mium.
SUBJECT :
REFERENCE:
CITY OF EL CAJON
CITY COUNCIL POLICY
Insurance Requ irements
Adopted 7/26/94
Amended 11 /2 9/05
Amended 04/1 4/1 5
EXH IBIT D
POLICY
D-3
EFFECTIVE PAG E
04/1 4/1 5 6 of 8
4. PUBLIC WORKS PROJ ECTS
In addition to the sta ndards set forth above, insurance policies fo r public works projects
must also meet the fo llowing insurance re quirements set out in the most recent ed ition of
th e Green Book adopted by the City Council:
a. All insurance certifi cates shall bear an endorsement or shall have attached a rider
whereby it is provided that, in the event of ex piration or proposed cancellation of
such policy for any re ason wh atsoever, the City shall be notified by certified mai l,
return receipt req uested , giving a sufficient time befo re the date thereof to comply
with any applicable law or statute, but in no event less than thirty (30) days before
exp iration or cance llation is effective, the prov isions of section 3 herein
notwithstanding; and
b. Compliance with Labor Code §§3700 and 3800 re lating to Workers' Compensation .
c. Requirements of the Green Book shall prevail.
5. PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
An applica nt for permit(s) to do work with in the public ri ght-of-way may establish
satisfactory proof of liability insurance in the fo llowing manner:
a. CONTRACTO RS
Contractors must fu rnish the City with a certificate of liabi lity ins urance, which meets
the requirements set forth above and any other City req uirements contai ned in this
policy.
b. HOMEOWN ERS / PROPERTY OWNERS
Homeowners/Property owners requesting a permit to do work with in City rights-ofway
or easements immediately adjacent to their respective ow ned or occu pied
property, solely for the owner's personal benefit, shall be re quired to furnish the City
with a copy of their homeowner's/prope rty owner's liability insurance policy, wh ich
meets the req uireme nts set forth above, with the minimum limits described in
category 3 under the heading "POLICY," above. The policy must be effective during
the entire pe riod of the proposed work, plus two (2) calendar years, and must
provide coverage for claims arising from the work performed , or improvements
owned , by the homeowner in the rig ht-of-way or easement. If the encroachme nt is
S U BJECT :
REFEREN CE :
C I TY OF EL CAJ O N
C I TY C O U N C I L P O LI CY
I n s u ra n ce Req u irements
Adopted 7/26/94
Ame n d ed 1 1 /29/05
Ame n d ed 04/1 4/1 5
EXH I BIT D
POLICY
D-3
E FF E C TIVE PAG E
04/1 4/1 5 7 of 8
ongoin g , a n n u al pro of of i n s u rance s h a l l b e req u ired . T h e req u i rement to n ame the
C ity a s a n add itio n a l i n s u red, a nd the req u irement fo r a policy for two (2) additional
ca len dar years , may each be waived by the C ity C o u n ci l o r the C ity M anager (or her
desi gnee) i n cases of extreme h a rds h i p , i n their d iscretion.
c. P O L L UT I O N EXC L U S I O N
Ap plicatio n s fo r the i n sta l lation o f mon itoring wells for t h e evaluatio n o f g roundwater
pollution or fo r the d ischarge of formerly polluted g ro u n dwater i nto the C ity sewer
system m ust be accompan ied by a certificate of liability i n s u rance p rovided by the
p roperty owner. Such liability insura n ce may not contai n a pollution exclusion clause
and must expl icitly i n d em n ify the C ity against all hazards which may res u lt from
e ithe r of these activities , including a worse n ing of pollution, e ither within the
subs u rface adjacent to the original p o l l ution o r within the C ity sewer syste m .
If the p roperty owne r i s u n a ble t o p rovide i n s u rance wh ich addresses both gen era l
liability a n d pol lution liability, the e nviron mental comp a ny o r oth er appropri atel y
q u a l ified entity contracting with the p roperty owne r for e ither mon ito ring we l l ·
i n stallati o n or g ro u n dwate r pollution reme d i atio n , may fu rnish p o l l ution l i a b i l ity
insura n ce on behalf of the prope rty owner.
Any i ns u ra n ce a pp roved u n der t h is s u bsection c. s h a l l be a n occurrence policy, and
s h a l l oth e rwise com p ly with the p rovisions of t h is P o l icy.
d . P U B L I C UTI LITI ES
This pol icy as it rel ates to work in the public rig hts-of-way shall not be app l icable to
Cable TV, Helix Wate r D i strict, Padre D a m M u n icipal Water D istrict, S B C , S a n
Diego Gas & Electric, o r a n y other p u blic utility.
e. TRAN S P O RTAT I O N / OVERSIZE LOADS - P E R MITS - See C h a pter 1 0 . 24 of the
El C aj o n M un icipal Code.
S U BJ E CT :
REFEREN C E :
C ITY O F E L CAJO N
C I TY CO U N C I L POLICY
I n s u ra n ce Req u i reme nts
Adopted 7/26/94
Amen ded 1 1 /29/05
Amen ded 04/1 4/1 5
T I M E L I M ITS / CAN C ELLATION P ROVI S IONS
EX H I B I T D
POLICY
D-3
E F F ECTIVE PAG E
04/1 4/1 5 8 of 8
A l l l iab i lity i n s u ra n ce req u i red purs u a n t to this pol icy shall p rovide coverage for a sufficient time
p e riod to p ro tect the C ity from liab i l ity. The i n s u rer i s req u ired to p rovide a m i n i m u m of thirty (30)
d ays-n otice of cance l lation of any p o licy. With the approval of the City Atto rney (except as
p rovide d i n s ectio n 4 , h e rein) this o bligation may be red uced to n ot l ess th a n ten ( 1 0) d ays written
n otice , b u t o n ly for te rmination d u e to the n o n -payment of a ny pre m i u m . I n no event shall a policy
be accepted which te rminates prior to the comp letio n of the activity to be cove red.
I n cert a in circumstances , it may be i m p ra cticable to obtain conti n u i n g i n s u rance coverage d u e to
the d u ration of the a ctivity o r the cost of p re mature ren ewal . U n d e r s u ch circu mstances, an
exception to the coverage period may b e made so long a s the po l icy is renewed o r rep laced with
an accepta b le i n s urance ca rrier a n d t h e re is no lapse in covera g e . M a i nte nance of proper
ins ura n ce cove rag e is a material term of a ny contract with the C i ty a nd fa i l u re to mai ntain o r
ren ew cove rage o r t o p rovide evidence o f ren ewal may b e treated as a material b reach o f
c o ntract.
A LTERNATIVE RISK MANAG E M E N T PRACTICES; S ELF-INS U RANCE; RISK-POO L I N G
Alterna tive risk ma nagement practice s , s u ch a s self-insura n ce, r i s k p o o l i n g , risk retention g roups,
a n d other s u ch progra m s , will be a ccepted i n lieu of commercial i n s u ra nce po licies p rovided that
the coverag e meets the req u irem ents of this Policy. Any such a lte rnative risk ma nagement
p ractices must m eet the finan cial stre ngth a n d s u rplus req u i rements reflected by the Best's
Ratings req u ired of commercial i n s u ra n ce u n der this Pol icy.
EXHIBIT "E"
DECLARATION OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS
In submitting its proposal, SUBRECIPIENT represents that SUBRECIPIENT's responses to the
following questions are true and correct:
1. The proposed public project may affect the market value of real property in the vicinity of the project
site.
a.
b.
C.
Does the SUBRECIPIENT or anyone in the SUBRECIPIE NT's organization Yes
have a financial interest in real property located within 2500 feet of the □ 􀃂 '°\
ro·ect site?
Has the SUBRECIPIENT or anyone in the SUBRECIPIE NT's organization,
rendered professional services concerning real property located within 2500
feet of the ro·ect site? □
Has the SUBR ECIPIENT or anyone in the SUBRECIPIE NT's organization
received income from real property that is located within 2500 feet of the
ro·ect site? □
a. Does the SUBRECIPIENT or anyone in the SUBRECIPIE NT's organization
have a financial interest in a business located within 2500 feet of the project
s􀃃? □
b. Has the SUBRECIPIENT or anyone in the SUBRECIPIE NT's organization
rendered professional services concerning a business that is located within
2500 feet of the ro·ect site? □
c. Has the SUBRECIPIENT or anyone in the SUBRECIPIE NT's organization
received income from a business that is located within 2500 feet of the
ro·ect site? □
3. Does anyone in SUBRECIPIE NT's organization have a spouse or other family
member who has a financial interest in an such real propert or business? □
SUBRECIPIENT'S SIGNATURE
East County Transitional Living Center, Inc.
This docume t is signed by an individual clearly authorized to bind SUBRECIPIE NT.
Date:
Harold H. Brown, Chief Executive Officer
EXHIBIT "F"
0MB CIRCULAR A-133 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
AUDITS OF STATES, LOCAL GOVERNMENTS AND
NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS
CFDA No. for this Grant/Agreement: 14.2 1 8 (Community Development Block Grant)
Non-Federal entities that expend $750,000 or more in a year in Federal awards shall have a single or programspecific
audit conducted for that year in accordance with the provisions of 0MB Circular
A-133. Please complete the following by placing an "X" in the appropriate box.
□ expended $750,000 or more in
Federal funds during the prior fiscal year (FY 2018-19)/calendar year (201 8).
􀀃 􀀄; 􀀅=s 1􀀆s.±􀀇 L:v􀀇 (l-t {y. 􀀌 did not expend $750,000 or more in
Federal funds during the prior fiscal year (FY 201 8-19)/calendar year (2018).
I HEREBY CERTIFY I have the authority to sign for the above named agency and that the agency will comply
with the provisions of 0MB Circular A-133 and any other applicable Federal and State laws and regulations
hereinatt::. •nacte;􀃄
Signature
Print Name
Title:
Date: lo .,. I t - J1 l) l j
EXHIBIT "G"
WORKER'S COMPENSATION INSURANCE CERTIFICATE
The Subrecipient shall execute the following form as required by the California Labor Code,
Sections 1860 and 1861 .
I am aware of the provision of Section 3700 of the Labor Code which requires every employer to
be insured against liability for worker's compensation or to undertake self-insurance in
accordance with the provisions of that code, and I will comply with such provisions before
commencing the performance of the work of this contract.
By:
Harola H. Brown, Chief Executive Officer