BETWEEN THAEG CRITEYE MOEFN ETL CAJON AND
East County Transitional Living Center, Inc. betweenT tHhIeS CAIGTYR EOEFM EELN CT AisJ OmNad, ea amnudn eicnitpearle cdo irnptoo rtahtiiso nq1V\, herein aftdear yr eoffe r,rJtoas􀀄C ity," and, 2020, by and East County
Transitional Living Center, Inc., referred to as "Subrecipient"; a nonprofit organization under the laws of the State of California, hereinafter
housing,W reHcEreRaEtiAonSa, l,t heedruec eaxtiiosntsa l,a a nnede cdh iwldi thcainr et hsee rCviictye so af nEdl dCeavjoenlo ptom pernotavild per oag rvaamrise;t ya nodf services, including
the progWramHE eRnEtitAleSd, the Subrecipient has expressed a desire and has the expertise and experience to operate "Emergency Shelter Program for Homeless" in El Cajon; and
DepartmWenHt EoRf EHAoSu,s itnhge aCnidty Uhrbaas n eDnteevreeldo pimnteon ta, hceornetirnaacftt ewr ictha llethde HUUnDit,e dto Setxaetecsu teo f thAem Ceirtiyc'as tChoromumghu niittys DAcetv oeflo 1p9m7 4en, at sB laomcke nGdreadn,t ,h heerereininaaftfeter rc acallelledd t hCeD "BAGct," . program under the Housing and Community Development
follows: NOW, THEREFORE, IT IS HEREBY MUTUALLY AGREED by and between the parties hereto as
1. City Review:
Trehsep eCcitt yt ore stheerv oepse trhaet ioring hot ft oth ree view and approve actions and decisions taken by the Subrecipient with Emergency Shelter Program for Homeless applicable regulations. for compliance with all
2. Subrecipient Status:
The City recognizes the Subrecipient as an independent nonprofit organization and agrees to cooperate
in protecting its image as a politically neutral organization.
3. Service Area:
4.
The Service area is City-wide in the City of El Cajon.
Scope of Services:
BThued gSeut bsreetc fiopriethn ta ssh all perform all services described in the project description and Scope of Work and Exhibit herein by this reference. "A" to this Agreement, a copy of which is attached hereto and incorporated
5. Time of Performance:
6.
7.
Said services of the Subrecipient are to commence no sooner than July 1, 2020 no later than and shall be completed June 30, 2021. Compensation and Method of Payment:
aTnhde aCpitpyl ischaabllle r eFiemdbeurarsl ere thgeu laStuiobnres,c iwpiheincht fhoar vaell onwoat bbleee cno sptasi din fcourr orerd r euinmdbeurr tsheed sinco apney o of tthheer Amgarneneemre bnyt any other Agency or private source of funding. The total of all reimbursements shall not exceed
One Hundred Thousand and no/100s dollars ($100,000.00). Compliance with Laws and Assurances:
tThhee HSouubsriencgip aienndt Cheormebmyu ansitsyu Dreesv ealnodp mceerntitf ieAsc tt hoaft 1it9 h7a4s, hcoemrepinliaefdte wr ictha lalendd twheil l Accotn, tiannude atoll ccoumrrepnlyt wanithd fruetquuriere mapepnlticsa absle t hfeeyd ereralal,t e sttoa taec, ceapntda nlcoec aal ndla wusse, oofr dFiendaenrcael sf,u nrdesg ufolart itohniss ,f epdoelriaclileys a, sgsuisidteedli nperos,g raamnd. Trehqisu ireAmgreenetms einnctl uidsi ngs uwbijtehcotu tt oli maitlal tisounc, hth ela Awcst,, Toirtdlein 2a,n Cceosd,e roefg Fueladteiornasl ,R epgoulilcaietios,n sg, uPidaertl in2e0s0,; Taintled 2C4o,d Ce oodfe F oefd Fereadl eRraelg Ruleagtiuolnasti oPnasr,t P70a rat n5d7 0P; uTbitlilce L2a9w C 8o7d-e5 8o1f .F ederal Regulations, Parts 3 and 5; Title 24
1
8.
9.
1 0.
1 1 .
Records Retention:
The Subrecipient shall maintain and retain all financial records, supporting documents, statistical
records and all other records pertaining to the use of the funds provided under this Agreement for a
period of four (4) years at a minimum, and in the event of litigation, claim or audit, the records shall be
retained until all litigation, claims, and audit findings involving the records have been fully resolved.
Records for non-expendable property acquired with Federal funds provided under this Agreement shall
be retained for four (4) years after the final disposition of such property.
Monitoring:
The City will conduct periodic program monitoring reviews. These reviews will focus on the extent to
which the planned program has been implemented, measurable goals achieved, effectiveness of
program management, and impact of the program. Authorized representatives of the City and HUD shall
have the right of access to all activities and facilities operated by the Subrecipient under this Agreement.
Facilities include all files, records, and other documents related to the performance of this Agreement.
Activities include attendance at staff, board of directors, advisory committee, and advisory board
meetings and inspection by City and HUD representatives, and to ensure that its employees and board
members furnish such information, as in the judgment of City and HUD representatives, may be relevant
to the question of compliance with contractual conditions and HUD directives, or the effectiveness,
legality and achievements of the program.
Program Reporting:
The Subrecipient agrees to prepare and submit financial, program progress, evaluations, and other
reports as required by HUD or the City. The Subrecipient shall maintain such program, property,
personnel, financial and other records and accounts as are considered necessary by HUD or the City to
assure proper accounting for all Contract funds. Sub-recipient shall submit all financial requirements in
Exhibit "B" (Request for Payment forms). All of the Subrecipient's records, with the exception of
confidential client information, shall be made available to representatives of the City and the appropriate
Federal agencies. The Subrecipient is required to submit data necessary to complete the Annual
Subrecipient Performance Report and other federal documents in accordance with HUD regulations and
in the format and at the time designated by the City. Subrecipient shall submit a Periodic Performance
Report (Exhibit "C") for the reporting period (may be either monthly or quarterly, as agreed to with the
City at time of contract execution) by the 1 0th day of the month following the reporting period. The
reports shall include the following information:
A Number of individual clients served (individual client may be a person or a household)
B. Race of clients served
C. Ethnicity of clients served (Hispanic, yes or no - a person may be of any race and be Hispanic)
D. Number of disabled clients served (as defined by the Social Security Administrative Guidelines)
E. Whether or not the head of the household is female
F. Number of clients who are low income (per HUD guidelines)
G. Whether or not the client is an El Cajon resident.
H. Number of new clients assisted.
In addition, a brief narrative must accompany the report (Exhibit "C-2"). The narrative should include
(but is not limited to) the following:
A Outreach methods used;
B. Number and disposition of complaints received; and
C. Progress made toward goals as evidenced in Exhibit "A", or an explanation of lack thereof.
D. Any other accomplishments or problems/concerns the Agency wishes to report.
Accounting:
The Subrecipient must establish and maintain on a current basis, an adequate accrual and accounting
system in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and standards. The City, the
Federal Grantor Agency, the Comptroller General of the United States, or any of their duly-authorized
representatives, shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of the Subrecipient
2
twrahnicshc ridpitrieocntsly. pertain to the above project for the purpose of audit, examination, excerpts and
12. Audits:
13.
Teahceh S fuisbcraelc iypeieanr tF ise dreerqaul irfeudn dtos aarrera nregcee fivoer da nu ninddeer ptehnisd ecnotn tfrinaactn. cAiaul daitnsd mcoumstp bliea nince c aoumdpitl iaanncneu awllyit hf o2r CFR Part 200, Subpart F. (Exhibit "F") source agencies as part of the City's audAit nre asupdoint smibaiyli tibees .c onducted by Federal, State, or local funding The Subrecipient shall forward a copy of
the independent audit to the City for review within thirty (30) days of its completion. (30) days of the submittal of said audit report, the Subrecipient shall provide a written respWointhsien ttoh iratyll fcinodnidnigtio nasn do re xfipnldaiinng sa rperpooprotesde di n ressaoidlu taiound,i t inrecpluodritn. gT hae srcehsepdounlsee fomru scto rerexactminign ea enay chd ecfiocniednitcioy.n Aolrl cthoer raeucdtioit nr eapcotirot.n s related to conditions or findings shall take place within six (6) months after receipt of
Tinhsep eCctiitoyn's, atou thaonriyz eda nrde parell sebnotoaktisv,e sd oschuamll eantt sa, ll ptaimpeerss, , hraevceo rdasc,c epssro pfoerr tyth ea npdu rpporesme isoefs auodf it thoer aSnudb reexcaipmieinnta. tiSonusb roefc itphiee nSt usbtareffc iwpiilel ncto'so pperoragtrea mfu. llIyf iwndithic aatuiothnosr iozfe md iasuadpiptororsp rwiahtieonn tohre my icsoanpdpuliccat taiound iotsf ethnec ufumnbdesr eodf athnisd Adgerdeuecmteedn tf rcoamu steh et hSeu bCrietyc iptoie nret'qsu iCreD Ba Gs paewcaiarld .a uSdhito, utlhde thceo sst poefc itahle aauudditi t cwoinllf irbme mmiissaapppplriocpartiioantio no ro r mmisisaapppprloicpartiiaotnio no.f fuInn dtsh, eth ee vSeunbt retchiep ieCntit ys haulsl eresi mthbuer sjeu dthiceia Cl itsyy tshtee ma mtoou nrte ocfo vtheer mcoissatsp ipnr oapdrdiaittioend toor amwisaardpsp. lied funds, the Subrecipient shall reimburse the City for legal fees and court
Beneficiary Qualification:
pTrhoeg rSaumb riedceinptiiefinetd aing rees to guarantee that at least fifty-one percent (51 %) of the beneficiaries of the Exhibit "A," households. Under the CDBG reSgcuolpaeti oonf sW, othrke afnodll oBwuidngge tc, laiernet elolews anadre m pordeesruamtee idn ctoom eb ep elroswo nas nodr pmeordsoenrast,e biantcteormeed pspeorsuosness ,a hnodm cealne sqsu paelifrys ofnosr , sdeirsvaicbele dre gpaerrdsolensss, oillfi teinrcaotem ep:e rasbounsse, da ncdh ilmdriegnra, net ldfaerrmly wthoarnk ethrse. cBuernreenfitc iaapripelsic aqbulael ifIynicnogm oen Lthime itbsa sscish eodf uinlec opmubel isshhaeldl hbayv eH UaDn afonrn uthael iSnaconm Deie egqou aMl StoA ,o wr hleicshs fdoerf ionbetsa itnhien gm tahxeim cuumrre inntc oamppel icfoarb lloew H aUnDd mInocdoemrea teL iimncitosm sceh heoduuslee hfoolrd es.a Tchh ey eSaurb oref ctihpeie Antg irse eremsepnotn steibrmle yideeanrtsif iaefdte irn c oPnacralugsriaopnh o 6f ,t hTei mAeg roefe mPeernfot.r mance. The Subrecipient shall retain these forms for three (3)
14. Assignment:
TChitiys CAogurenecmil. eCnto inss ennott asshsailgl nbaeb lgei vbeyn t haet Sthueb rseocleip iednistc wreittihoonu to tfh teh ee xCpirteys sC opurinocr ilw. rAitnteyn actotenmsepnt t boyf tthhee cSounbsrteitcuipteie an t mtoa taesrsiaigl nb raenayc hp eorff otrhmisa Ancgere oefm theen tt eurpmosn owf hthicihs Athger eCeimtye mnta syh, aallm boen ngu ollt haenrd rveomide daineds ,s ahnadll without limitation, cancel, terminate, or suspend this Agreement.
15. Termination and Termination Costs:
dTahyiss Awgrrietteemn ennott imcea yto b teh ete ormthinear tpeadr tiyn. wAhgorelee omre innt pmarut sat tb aen yre taimchee bdy beyi thbeort hp apratyrt iuepso ans gtiov inrega tshoirntys (a3n0d) 2co0n0d. itTiohnes Cfoitry t eMrmaninaagteiorn isin hceormebpyli aenmcep owwitehr ethde tpor ogviviseio nsas ido f nToittliec e2 sCuobdjeec ot ft oF erdaetirfaicla Rtioeng ublayt iothnes PCaitryt Council.
oTrh es uCbitsyt amntaiayl imremduecdtiiaotne lyin t eCrmDiBnaGt ef uthnisd inAgg refoerm tehnet uCpoonntr athcet taecrmtiviintya tioorn ,i fs ufosrp eannsyio rne, adsioscno nthtien utaimtioenly, cSoumbrpelceitpioienn ot fm tahtee rwiaollryk fauinlsd etor cthoims pAlyg rweiethm aennyt tise rrme nodf ethreisd A imgrpereombaebnlte, ,t hinef eCaitsyi bmlea, yo tra kime poonses iobfl em. oIfr et hoef nthoen caocmtiopnlisa npcreo vcidoesdts ,u nwdheorl l2y oCrF pRa rPtiaarltly 2 t0e0r,m winhaictihn gin tchlue daews aterdm, pwoirtharhiloyl dwinitgh hfuotludrineg a cwaasrhd,s d, isaanldlo wotihnegr, rseemrveicdeiess r ethnadte raerde alnedg aalllyl naevcaeilsasbaleri.l yI nin csuurcrhe de cvoesntts, ptheer foSrmuberde ciinp iegnoto ds hfaalilt hb ien caocmcoprednasnactee dw iftohr thaell
3
16.
terms of this Agreement that have been previously reimbursed, to the date of said termination to the
extent that CDBG funds are available from HUD.
Program Income:
A Program income defined as that money generated from the CDBG funds received herein, and
shall be retained by the Subrecipient.
B. The Subrecipient shall utilize the program income in accordance with Exhibit "A" and all
provisions of this Agreement shall apply to the disposition of program income.
C. Disposition of program income shall be done in accordance with Paragraph 1 8 of this
Agreement.
1 7. Reversion of Assets:
1 8.
Upon the expiration or termination of this Agreement, for any reason whatsoever, the Subrecipient shall
forthwith transfer to the City, any CDBG funds on hand at the time of such expiration or termination and
any accounts receivable attributable to the use of CDBG funds including without limitation, program
income. Further, any real property under the control of the Subrecipient that was acquired or improved
in whole or in part with CDBG funds in excess of $25,000 shall be: (a) used to meet one of the national
objectives set forth in Title 24 CFR 570.208, or any successor statute, until five (5) years after the
expiration or termination of the Agreement, or for such longer period of time as determined to be
appropriate by the City at its sole discretion; or (b) disposed of in a manner that results in the City's
being reimbursed in the amount of the current fair market value of real property less any portion of the
value attributable to expenditures of non-CDBG funds for acquisition of, or improvement to such real
property.
Independent Contractor:
The parties hereto in the performance of this Agreement will be acting in an independent capacity and
not as agents, employees, partners, joint venturers, or associates of one another. The employees or
agents of one party shall not be deemed or construed to be the agent or employees of the other party
for any purpose whatsoever.
1 9. Insurance:
20.
The Subrecipient shall neither commence work under this Agreement until it has obtained all insurance
required hereunder in a company or companies acceptable to the City nor shall the Subrecipient allow
any subcontractor to commence work on a subcontract until all insurance required of the subcontractor
has been obtained.
The Subrecipient shall agree to provide an acceptable certificate of insurance and endorsements
evidencing the coverage as specified in El Cajon City Council Policy D-3, Insurance Requirements,
which is attached hereto as Exhibit "D" and made a part of this Agreement. All insurance policies shall
be subject to approval by CITY as to form and content.
Subrecipient shall furnish properly executed certificates of insurance to CITY prior to commencement of
services under this Agreement. Such certificate shall:
A Clearly evidence all coverages required above, including specific evidence of a separate
endorsement naming CITY and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and
employees as additionally insureds;
B. Indicate whether coverage provided is on claims-made or occurrence basis;
C. Provide that such insurance shall. not be materially changed, terminated, or allowed to expire
except on thirty (30) days prior written notice, via first class mail to CITY; and
D. Subrecipient agrees to provide CITY with copies of all required policies upon request.
Subrecipient shall also maintain Worker's Compensation Insurance (Exhibit "G") with statutory limits,
and employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than $2,000,000 per accident.
No Benefit to Arise to Local Employee:
No member, officer, or employee of the City, or its designees or agents, no member of the governing
body of the City, and no other public official who exercises any functions or responsibilities with respect
to the program during his or her tenure or for one year thereafter, shall have any interest, direct or
4
2 1 .
indirect, in this Agreement or in any contract or subcontract, or the proceeds thereof, for work to be
performed in connection with the program assisted under this Agreement.
Certification Regarding Lobbying:
The Subrecipient certifies to the best of their knowledge and belief, that:
A. No Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid, by or on behalf of the
undersigned, to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of
any agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress in connection with the
awarding of any Federal contract, the making of any cooperative agreement, and the extension,
continuation, renewal, amendment, or modification of any Federal contract, grant, loan, or
cooperative agreement.
B. If any funds other than Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid to any person
for influencing or attempting to influence any officer or employee of any agency, a Member of
Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or any employee of a Member of Congress in
connection with this Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement, the undersigned
shall complete and submit Standard Form-LLL, "Disclosure Form to Report Lobbying," in
accordance with its instructions.
C. The Subrecipient shall require that the language of this certification be included in the award
documents for all sub-awards at all tiers (including subcontractors, sub-grantees, and contracts
under grants, loans, and cooperative agreements), and that all Subrecipients shall certify and
disclose accordingly.
22. Conflict of Interest:
A. Subrecipient covenants that neither it, nor any officer or principal of its firm, has or shall acquire
any interest, directly or indirectly, which would conflict in any manner with the interests of City or
which .would in any way hinder Subrecipient's performance of services under this Agreement
Subrecipient further covenants that in the performance of this Agreement, no person having any
such interest shall be employed by it as an officer, employee, agent or subcontractor without the
express written consent of the City Manager. Subrecipient agrees to at all times avoid conflicts
of interest or the appearance of any conflicts of interest with the interests of City in the
performance of this Agreement (also see Exhibit "E").
B. City understands and acknowledges that Subrecipient is, as of the date of execution of this
Agreement, independently involved in the performance of non-related services for other
governmental agencies and private parties. Subrecipient is unaware of any stated position of
City relative to such projects. Any future position of City on such projects shall not be
considered a conflict of interest for purposes of this section.
23. Use of Funds for Entertainment or Gifts:
The Subrecipient certifies and agrees that it will not use funds provided through this Agreement to pay
for entertainment or gifts.
24. Joint Funding:
25.
26.
For programs in which there are sources of funds in addition to CDBG funds, the Subrecipient shall
provide proof of such funding. The City shall not pay for any services provided by the Subrecipient
which are funded by other sources. All restrictions and/or requirements provided in this Agreement
relative to accounting, budgeting, and reporting applies to the total program regardless of funding
sources.
Changes in Grant Allocation:
The City reserves the right to reduce the grant allocation when the City's fiscal monitoring indicates that
the Subrecipient's rate of expenditure will result in unspent funds at the end of the program year.
Changes in the grant allocation will be done after consultation with the Subrecipient and approval by the
City Council. Such changes shall be incorporated into this Agreement by written amendments.
Fiscal Limitations:
The United States of America through HUD may in the future place programmatic or fiscal limitation(s)
on CDBG funds not presently anticipated. Accordingly, the City reserves the right to revise this
Agreement in order to comply with actions affecting HUD program funding. In the event of funding
5
27.
28.
29.
reduction, at its sole dthisec Creittyio mn, alyim riet dthuece S tuhber ebcuidpgieent to'sf athueth Aogrirteye tmo ecnotm ams iat awnhdo lsep eonr da sf uton dcso, sat ncda tmegaoyr yr,e satnridc tm thaey tShueb rCeictyip iteon ti'ms pulseem oefn bt oath r eitds uucnticoonm imn itftuendd ainngd, uwnisthp ernets pfuencdt st.o W fuhnedrein gH UfoDr hthaids dAirgerceteemd eonr tr, etqhuee sCteitdy rMeavinsaingge rt hoer Ahgisr/eheemr ednets figonr eseu cmh apyu rapcots efo. rT thhee CCiittyy Mina nimagpeler moer nhtiisn/gh ear ndde seifgfencetein mg asyu cahc t af orre tdhuec tCioitny iinn tsou sthpee nSduinbgre tchiep ieonpte roaf tihoins /hoef rt hinet eAngtrioene mtoe nsto f oarc tu. pI nt on osi xetvye (n6t0, )h doawyesv, eurp, osnh athll raeney ( 3re) vdisaiyosn wmriattdeen bnyo ttihcee nCoittyic eef feocf t seuxcphe nredvitiusrieosn , apnrdo vleidgeadll y thbaint dsinugc hc oammmoiutmntesn thsa mvea dbee ebny tchoem Smuibttreedc ipinie ngto boedf ofraei thit raencde ivaerde otherwise allowable and that such commitments are consistent with HUD cash withdrawal guidelines.
Purchase and Invoice Deadlines:
pPeurrfcohrmasaen coef epqeuriiopdm aenndt oarll perqoupipemrtye nmt ubsiltl sb aer ec otom bpele tpeadi db beefoforere t hthee l alasst t tthwreoe ( 2()3 )m monotnhtsh so fo tfh itsh ep einriiotida.l Nmoo netxhpse nodf atbhlee oinri tniaoln -peexrpfoernmdaanbclee pproeprieordty uonrl eesqsu ipamppernotv iesd t ob yb et hpeu rcChiatys eind dwurriitningg .t hIen vfioniacle tsh rfeoer (a3l)l Dobelpigaarttimonesn t inwcituhrirne ds ixutyn d(e6r0 )t hdiasy sA garfeteerm theen ti nmitiuasl tp ebrefo srmubamncitete pde rtoio dt htee rmRiendaetivoenl odpamtee notr tahnedy Hmoauys ninogt be honored. Exceptions to the preceding limitations require prior written approval by the City.
Invoices will not be honored unless and until periodic reports are current.
Non-expendable Property:
wA itrhe cCoDrdB Gsh faulnl dbse. mThaisin traeicnoerdd sbhya tlhl eb eS purborveicdiepdie tnot tfhoer Ceaitcyh a sit ewme llo af sn obne-inegx paevnadilaabbllee fporro pinesrptye catcioqnu iarendd ahuadviint gb ya t hues eCfiutyl ulifpeo no fr emasooren atbhlea nn ootnicee . (N1)o ny-eeaxrp eanndda balen parcoqpueirstiyti omne acnoss t taonf goibnlee ptehrosuosnaanld p rdooplelarrtys p($ro1p,0e0r0ty.0 w0)i thoor umt otrhee p perri ourn iwt. rTithteen Saupbprerocvipaile notf sthhael l Cniotyt .p uUrpcohna sceo omr palgertieoen too rp ueracrhlya steer nmoinna-etixopne nodf atbhlies pArgorpeeermtye anct,q uthiree dC foitry threiss eprrovegsra mth ea nrdig ChtD BtoG dfuentedrsm iinn ec otmhep liafinnacel dwiisthp oaspitpiolinca bolfe slaawids naonnd- reexgpuelnadtioanbsle. pDriosppeorstiyti.o n may include, but is not limited to, the City taking possession of said non-expendable
Expendable Personal Property:
Epexrpseonndaal bplero ppeerrtsyo. nTahl ep rSoupberretyc ipreiefenrt ss htoa lla nll otta pnugribclhea spee rosro naagl reper otpoe rptyu rcohthaesre tehxapne nndoanb-elex ppeenrdsaobnlael parpopproevrtayl wofi tthh ea Cunityit. value of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more per unit without the prior written
30. Purchase or Lease of Non-Expendable Property or Equipment:
Tpehres oSnuablr epcroippieenrtty s ohra lel qoubitpamine tnhtr eoev edro ocunme ethnoteuds abnidds d porliloarr sto ( $p1u,r0c0h0a.s0in0g) ionr ulenaits ivnaglu aen. yT nhoen S-euxbpreencdipaiebnlet pshroavlli dpeudr cthoa tshee oCri tyle aasse w feroll ma st hbee inlogw aevsat ilraebslpeo fnosri vines paencdt iorens paonnds aibuled itb uidpdoenr . reTahsiso ninavbelen tnooryti cseh aaltl tbhee request of the City.
31. Travel and Conference Restrictions:
Tprhoev iSduebdr tehcriopuiegnht tcheisrt Aifigerse aenmde nagt. rees that travel and conference expenses will not be paid for by funds
32. Affirmative Action Policy:
TChDeB SGu fburnedcsip isehnat lls phraollv imdea keeq uaa "lg eomodp lfoayitmh"e netf faonrtd t oc aerneseur raed tvhaant caellm pernotje ocptsp ofurtnudneitdie sw hfoorl lym oinro irnit ipeas rta nbdy wwoommeenn'. s Ap "ugboliocda tifoanitsh;" deifrfeocrtt inscolluicditeast,i obnust; ias nndo tr eliqmuietesdti ntgo , aasdsviestratinsicneg finro mon em oinro mritoy rea nmdi nowroitmy eonr caosmsismtaunncitey ooffrigcaen oizr aotitohnesr , ocrgoanntriazacttioorn sg rtohuapt sp, rolvoicdael asstasitset aonrc ef etod eirna lt hme irneocrriutyit maenndt awnodm pelna cebmuseinnet sosf minorities and women. In addition, the Subrecipient shall make every effort to employ residents of the
6
area and shall keep a record of the positions that have been created directly or as a result of this
program.
A. Provision of Program Services
( 1 ) The Subrecipient shall not on the ground of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual
orientation, disability or familial status exclude any person from participation in, deny
any person the benefits of, or subject any person to discrimination under any program
or activity funded in whole or in part with CDBG funds.
(2) The Subrecipient shall not under any program or activity funded in whole or in part with
CDBG funds, on the ground of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation,
disability, or familial status:
(a) Deny any facilities, services, financial aid or other benefits provided under the
program or activity.
(b) Provide any facilities, services, financial aid or other benefits which are different
or are provided in a different form from that provided to others under the
program or activity.
(c) Subject to segregated or separate treatment in any facility in, or in any manner
or process related to receipt of any service or benefit under the program or
activity.
(d) Restrict in any way access to, or in the enjoyment of any advantage or privilege
enjoyed by others in connection with facilities, services, financial aid, or other
benefits under the program or activity.
(e) Treat an individual differently from others in determining whether the individual
satisfies any admission, enrollment, eligibility, membership, or other
requirement or condition, which the individual must meet in order to be provided
any facilities, services, or other benefit provided under the program or activity.
(f) Deny an opportunity to participate in a program or activity as an employee.
(3) The Subrecipient may not utilize criteria or methods of administration which have the
effect of subjecting individuals to discrimination on the basis of race, color, national
origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or familial status or have the effect of defeating
or substantially impairing accomplishment of the objectives of the program or activity
with respect to individuals of a particular race, color, national origin, sex, sexual
orientation, disability, or familial status.
(4) The Subrecipient, in determining the site or location of housing or facilities provided in
whole or in part with CDBG funds, may not make the selections of such site or location
which have the effect of excluding individuals from, denying them the benefits of, or
subjecting them to discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual
orientation, disability, or familial status or which have the purpose or the effect of
defeating or substantially impairing the accomplishment of the objectives of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 and amendments thereto.
(5) (a) In administering a program or activity funded in whole or in part with CDBG
funds regarding which the Subrecipient has previously discriminated against
persons on the grounds of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation,
disability, or familial status, the Subrecipient must take affirmative actions to
overcome the effects of prior discrimination.
(b) Even in the absence of such prior discrimination the Subrecipient, in
administering a program or activity funded in whole in part with CDBG funds,
should take affirmative action to overcome the effects of conditions which would
otherwise result in limiting participation by persons of a particular race, color,
national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or familial status. Where
previous discriminatory practice or usage tends, on the grounds of race, color,
national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or familial status, to exclude
individuals from participation in, to deny them the benefits or, or to subject them
to discrimination under any program or activity to which CDBG funding applies,
7
B.
the Subrecipient has an obligation to take reasonable action to remove or
overcome the consequences of the prior discriminatory practice or usage, and
to accomplish the purpose of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and amendments
thereto.
(c) The Subrecipient shall not be prohibited by this part from taking any eligible
action to ameliorate an imbalance in services or facilities provided to any
geographic area or specific group of persons within its jurisdiction where the
purpose of such action is to overcome prior discriminatory practice or usage.
(6) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in Sections A(1 )-(5), nothing contained herein
shall be construed to prohibit the Subrecipient from maintaining or constructing
separate living facilities or rest room facilities for the different sexes. Furthermore,
selection on the basis of sex is not prohibited when institutional or custodial services
can properly be performed only by a member of the same sex as the recipients of the
services.
Employment Discrimination
(1) The Subrecipient shall not discriminate against any employee or applicant for
employment because of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or
familial status. The Subrecipient shall take affirmative action to ensure that applicants
are employed, and that employees are treated, during employment, without regard to
their race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or familial status.
Such action shall include, but not be limited to, the following: employment, upgrading,
demotion or transfer, recruitment or recruitment advertising, layoff or termination, rate of
pay or other forms of compensation and selection for training including apprenticeship.
The Subrecipient agrees to post in a conspicuous place available to employees and
applicants for employment, notices setting forth the provisions of this nondiscrimination
clause.
(2) The Subrecipient shall, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by or
on behalf of the Subrecipient, state that all qualified applicants will receive consideration
for employment without regards to race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation,
disability, or familial status.
(3) The Subrecipient shall send to each labor union or representative of workers with whom
it has a collective bargaining agreement or other contract or understanding, a notice to
be provided by the City's contracting officers advising the labor union or workers'
representative of the Subrecipient's commitments under Section 202 of Executive Order
No. 11246 of September 24, 1965, and shall post copies of the notice in conspicuous
places available to employees and applicants for employment.
(4) The Subrecipient shall comply with all provisions of Executive Order 11246 of
September 24, 1965, and of the rules, regulations, and relevant orders of the Secretary
of Labor.
(5) The Subrecipient shall furnish to the City all information and reports required by
Executive Order No. 11246 of September 24, 1965, and by the related rules,
regulations, and orders.
(6) In the event of the Subrecipient's failure to comply with any rules, regulations, or orders
required to be complied with pursuant to this Agreement, the City may cancel,
terminate, or suspend in whole or in part its performance and the Subrecipient may be
declared ineligible for further government contracts in accordance with the procedures
authorized in Executive Order No. 11246 of September 24, 1965, or by rule, regulation,
or order of the Secretary of Labor, or as otherwise provided by law.
(7) The Subrecipient shall include the provisions of the "Affirmative Action Policy,"
Paragraphs 8. (1) through (6), above, in every subcontract or purchase order unless
exempted by rules, regulations, or order of the Secretary of Labor, issued pursuant to
Section 204 of Executive Order No. 11246 of September 24, 1965, so that such
provisions will be binding upon each subcontractor or vendor.
8
oTrhdee rS uabsr etchiep ieCnitt ys hmalal yt adkeir escut cahs a cat iomne waniths roefs peencfot rtcoin agn ys uscuhb cpornotvraisciot nosr pinucrlcuhdainsge bsaencoctmioenss infovro lnveodn cino,m oprl iiasn tchere; apteronveidd ewdi,t hh, oliwtigeavteior,n twhiatht ain s tuhbec oenvteranct tothr eo rS vuebnrdeocri paiesn at reenstuelrt inotfo s suucchh d liirtiegcattioionn btoy pthroet eCcitt yth, eth ien tSeruebsrtesc oipf itehnet Umnaitye dre Squtaetsets .t he United States to
(8) oTfh eth eS uAbgree cDipiisecnrti mshinaallt ionno t Adcist corifm 1i9n7a5te (o4n2 tUhe.S b.Ca.s i6s1 o0f1 a egte sienq v.)io olart iwonit ho fr easnpye pctr otvoi saionny Aotchte orwf 1is9e7 q3 u(a2l9ifi eUd. Sd.iCsa. b7l9e4d) .i nTdhiveid Suuabl raesc ipprieonvitd sehda ilnl aSlseoc tpioronv 5id0e4 roefa tdhye aRcecheassb iltiota atinodn wusiteh othf ea lsl tCanDdBaGrd sfu ensdtsa balsisshisetde din b tuhield Ainrgcsh ittoec ptuhryasli cBaallryri edriss aAbclet do fp 1e9rs6o8n (s4 2in U c.oSm.Cp.l i4a1n5c1e et seq.) and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1992.
33. Religious Proselytizing or Political Activities:
34.
35.
iTnh ec oSnunbercetcioipni ewnti tahg rtheee s ptehrafto irtm wailnl cneo to pfe trhfoisrm A ogrr epeemrmenit t.a nFyu rnedlisg iouunsd eprr otsheisly taizginrege omr epnotl itwiciall l baect ivuistieeds perxocmluositvee alyn fyo rr epliegrifooursm aonr cpeo loitfi ctahle ascetirvviitcieess. rFeuqruthireerd iunn adcecro trhdisa nAcger eweimthe 2n4t aCnFdR n o5 7fu0n.2d0s0 sUh)a, lel tb. es euqs.e, dth teo Subrecipient shall not:
A. aEsn gpaagret oinf itnhhee rpernotglyra rmelsig iooru sse arcvticiveitsie sfu, nsduecdh auns dweor rsthhiisp , praerltig. iIof uasn i nosrtgruacntiizoant,i oonr pcroonsdeulycttisz astiuocnh, saecrtivviictieess ,f uthned eadc utivnidtieers thmisu spta brte, aonffde rpeadr tisceippaatriaotne lmy, uisnt btime ev oolur nltoacrayt ifoonr , thfreo mbe ntheefi cpiarorigersa mofs t hoer HUD-funded programs or services;
· B. Uinssetr udcirtieocnt, CoDr pBrGos feulnytdizsa ttoio snu; pport any inherently religious activities, such as worship, religious
C. rDeilsigciroimn ionra rtee liaggioauinss bt eali epfrso; gram beneficiary or prospective program beneficiary on the basis of
D. tUhsaet thCoDsBeG s trfuucntdusr efso ra rthe eu saecdq ufoisri tiinohne, rceonntlsyt rruecligtioionu,s o arc rtievhitaiebsil,i tation of structures to the extent
Faith Based Organizations:
Nagorteweitsh stota anbdiidneg bPy aErxaegcrauptivhe 3O3r daebr o1v3e2, 79if , Sasu bprreocmipuielgnat teisd aat 2F4a iCthF RB a5s.1e0d9 ,O ertg. asneiqz.a tion, Subrecipient
Alterations, Encumbrances, Mechanics' Liens:
iTmhper oSvuebmreecniptsie, ntth ea gpreroeps ethrtay t oitr w ailnl yn opt amrta kthee, roero sf,u fwfeirth toou bt et hmea dperi,o ar nwyr aittlteenr actioonnsse tnot thoef CthDeB CGi tfyu. nTdehde pSeurbforermcipeide,n mt ashtearlila lk efuerpn isthhee dp, roorp eorbtlyig afrteioen sfr oinmc uarrneyd ebnyc tuhme bSraunbcreecsi poier nltie. nTsh ea rSisuinbgre coiupti eonft aagnrye ewso trok submit performance, and labor and materials bonds on any improvements over $5,000.00.
36. Notices:
Ashlla nll obteic esse,n tm toe mthoer afonldloaw, inregp aodrtdsr, edsrsaefsts. , and communications shall be served in writing. The notices
CCoitym munity Development - Housing
City of El Cajon
2E0l 0C aCjoivnic, CCAen 9te2r0 2W0a y
9
ESausbtr eCciopuienntyt Transitional Living Center, IAntctn. : Harold H. Brown, 1C5h2ie7f EEaxsetc Mutaivien OStfrfeiceetr El Cajon, CA 92021
37.
38.
39.
Amendments: Variations:
oTrhaisl Awgrriteinegm wenithts anttoatc chomnetanitnse edm hbeorediine,s ethxcee wpth oalse hoef rtehien Apgroreviedmede,n at dodf itthioen p oarr tvieasr iahteiorent oo. f Tthhee rete ramres noof ftohrism Aalglyr eaepmpreonvt esdh aanll dn eoxt ebceu tveadl ibdy u tnhlee sCsi tmy Cadoeu ninci lt. he form of a written amendment to the Agreement
Savings Clause:
pIfr oavnisyi opnrso vsihsaiolln, inosfo ftahris a sA rgeraeseomneanbtl yi sp ofsosuibnlde , tcoo nbtein uinev ianl ifdu,l vfooridce, ionr euffneecnt fwoirtcheoaubt leb,e inthge i mrepmairaeindi nogr invalidated in any way.
Exhibit(s):
hTehree iEnx. hibits to this Agreement are an integral part of this Agreement and have each been incorporated
wINr itWteInT NabEoSvSe . WHEREOF, the parties have caused this Agreement to be executed as of the day and year first
CITY OF EL CAJON, A municipal corporation,
4£5CoJt, City Cler􀂶b By
East County/ ransitional Living Center, Inc.
By Ha Chief Executive Officer
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
10
EXH IBIT "A"
SCOPE OF WORK AND BUDG ET
Project: Emergency Shelter Program for Homeless
Contact Person: Harold H. Brown, Chief Executive Officer (619-977-0633)
Statement of Work: The Subrecipient agrees to use the Community Development Block Grant funds allocated
by the City for Fiscal Year 2020-2021 to provide the Emergency Shelter Program for Homeless Program/Project
in the City of El Cajon.
Section 1 - Work Description:
(To be completed by Subrecipient-must describe work activities approved by City Council)
? l\.(N 􀀌 d& "'􀀗 ' r.)2,.a., 􀀃 ,Ir'- 􀀆d .. V : dl.A.cJ2 􀀘 ""'-Lt\.... 􀀙 􀀚 , 􀀛
41:'.@PQ1.'il,V\,o,.-, fv-:, ' 􀀑 f</\C,,.,.,,-(;AM..£. 􀂑""1\ •
Sec::n 2 - Records and Reporting
The Subrecipient shall submit a Periodic Performance Report, which shall become Exhibit "C" hereto, for the
previous reporting period. Reporting periods may be monthly or quarterly, at the Subrecipient's option, but must
remain consistent throughout the year. Periodic Performance Reports are due by the 10th of the month following
the reporting period. These reports shall include the following information:
A. Number of individual clients served (individual client may be a person or a household)
B. Race of clients served
C. Ethnicity of clients served (Hispanic, yes or no - a person may be of any race and be Hispanic)
D. Number of disabled clients served (as defined by the Social Security Administrative Guidelines)
E. Whether or not the head of the household is female
F. Number of clients who are low income (per H U D guidelines)
G. Whether or not the client is an El Cajon resident.
H. Number of new clients assisted.
In addition, a brief n arrative (Exhibit "C-2") must accompany the report. Narrative should include (but is not
limited to) the following:
A. Outreach methods used;
B. Number and disposition of complaints received; and
C. Progress made toward goals as evidenced in Exhibit "A" , or an explanation of lack thereof.
D. Any other accomplishments or problems/concerns the Agency wishes to report.
Section 3 - Key Program Goals and Timeline
East County Transitional Living Center, Inc. will provide -----,--- ( 􀃋O individuals with
e, wJl.\ . i 􀀂 """rf(l).j􀀎'rh.;., +- 􀀏 MO-􀀐 􀀑"j .
services in the City of El Cajon during the period of July 1, 2020 to June 30, 2021.
Section 4 - Budget
The City agrees to pay Subrecipient a total sum of One H u nd red Thousand and no/1 00s dollars ($1 00,000.00)
to assist in the provision of the above mentioned services. It is further agreed that no funding shall be disbursed
unless the Subrecipient is in full compliance with the provisions of this Agreement. The City shall make payment
of these funds on a reimbursement basis contingent upon a written request and submittal of receipts or appropriate
proof of payment from the Subrecipient. Payments will not be paid unless and until periodic reports are current.
Payments may be made on a monthly or quarterly basis, at the Subrecipient's option.
EXH I BIT "A-2"
PUBLIC SERVICE PROGRAM BUDGET
PROJECT TITLE
I Emergency Shelter Program for Homeless
COST COMPONENT CDBG FUNDS OTHER FUNDS2
PERSONNEL SERVICES
Salaries (See Sched ule B of
Application) ,-5. ()00
Frinqe Benefits
Total Personnel 0 ?S, ooo 's.
CONTRACTUAL SERVICES
Professional Services I i,, 􀀜tV
Telephone
Util ities 1000
Rent 5000
Insurance (req uired) 􀂒 0 OO f.7
Mai ntenance "3 000
Travel/Mileaqe
Finqerprintinq
Other (specify)r,M,. 􀀄Jo. \ O (.? • o.an
Total Contractual
0 Loi S-ro"'G..
COMMOD ITIES
Program/Office Supplies
Printing
Postage/Office Eq uipment
Other (specify)
Total Commodities
0 0
Total Project Budget \ 00 00
IN-KIND TOTAL PROJECT
0 0
0 0
0 0
Use the space below to explain p rofessional services, office equipment expenditures or other cost
components that require clarification: •
1 n _ r-4 c,--., - 0-..p(+R 􀂓\>-'Ul-
Note: CDBG paid expenditures must be docu mented with receipts and or invoices that verify the expense was
incurred. To minimize the amount of expense documentation, we strongly suggest the C D B G dol lars be used to
pay for only a few program costs and not spread out over several line items. If CDBG funds are requ ested to pay
for Personnel Services (salaries), system-generated reports may be submitted, and copies of timecards,
paychecks, etc. may be retained in Subrecipient's administrative office, and m u st be m ade available for review
upon request as set forth in Paragraph 9 of this Agreement.
2 I ncludes Federal and non- Federal funding sources
FY2020-2021 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT PROGRAM
REQUEST FOR PAYMENT
**NOTE: To request Electronic Version of this form, send an e-mail to jkasviki@cityofelcajon.us
EXH IBIT "B"
'his Request for Payment is presented to the City of El Cajon to obtain reimbursement for the operation of the Project named below for the Payment Period listed below. The payment is
equested for the portion of the contract budget stated in Column B.
UBRECIPIENT t􀀉C.C'-'-:S --f􀀊􀀋t􀀌􀀍 J;\I􀁖 C."t,. .
'A YMENT PERIOD
REPARED BY
FY 2020-21
lb Title
lb Title
lb Title
daries & Wages
,yroll Taxes
"inge Benefits
ERSONNEL
ffice Suplies
)Stage
􀀺nt and Utilities
:lephone
ther
ther
ther
ther
ther
::>N-PERSONNEL
)TAL PROGRAM
Contract IExpenditures to
Budget Date
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0 $0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0 $0.00
$0 I $0.oo
Balance
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
Name
JUL
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
AUG
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
SEP
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
PROJECT
TOTAL PAYMENT
OCT
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
Phone
NOV
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
£,....􀀈'==J 5k.Qt... ?"'-!)􀀉
DEC
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
JAN
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
FEB
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0;00
$0.00
.MAR
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
APR
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
MAY
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
JUN
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
1ereby certify the above expenditures were incurred in carrying out the objective of the project contract, are authorized in the approved contract budget, and that contracted services were
:rformed in accordance with the Agreement.
Date Signature & Title of Subrecipient Executive
CITY OF EL CAJON
COM MU NITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT PROGRAM
PERIODIC PERFORMANCE REPORT
EXHI BIT "C"
FY Period Reported: FY 2020-2021 Quarter/Month Reported: _____________ Agency Name: foo-\ Col.M,..􀀍􀀎􀀏-s:f􀀐 L;v􀀉􀀊 (t. Reporter's Name: _______________ _
:,
j
Program Name: 􀁪- 􀁫 l 􀁬e--, Phone Number: _________________ _
Numbers served must reflect number of Persons (P) served. Number of Households (H) served may only be reported with prior
approval of the Redevelopment & Housing Division.
Please indicate (P) or (H) : ____?_ __________ Annual City Grant Amount: ______________
1 . TOTAL
White
Black / African American
Asian
American Indian / Alaskan
Native
Native Hawaiian / Other
Pacific Islander
American Indian / Alaskan
Native and White
Asian and White
Black / African American
and White
American Indian / Alaskan
Native & Black / African
American
Other/Multi-Racial
2. TOTAL
Extremely Low Income
(0-30% MFI)
Low Income
{>30-50% MFI)
Moderate Income
{>50-80% MFI)
Income above 80% MFI
3. TOTAL
Homeless
Female Headed Households
Disabled/Special Needs
(A)
Number of Persons
served with El Cajon's
CDBG funding this
Quarter/Month
Total # Each Race
(B)
How many in Column
(A) reported as
Hispanic (this
Quarter/Month for Each
Race)?
Total # of Hispanics
Each Race
(C)
Cumulative number of (D)
Persons served
Year-To-Date How many in Column
(July 1 to end of (C) reported as
current report period) Hispanic Year-To-Date?
Total # Each Race Total # of Hispanics
Year-to-Date Each Race Year-to-Date
IMPORTANT-PLEASE NOTE: 1 ) Hispanic is no longer considered a race, but an ethnicity and must be reported separately. A
member of any race must also report as Hispanic or Non-Hispanic. "Other" is for multi-racial reports only and must be identified in
the narrative report. 2) Totals for lines 1, 2, and 3 must match each other for each column. 3) List only unduplicated program
participants-clients receiving continued services from previous fiscal year may be counted only once during the new contract year.
4) A narrative report must accompany this form. The narrative should include the definition of "Persons Served" (typically El Cajon
residents) and should reflect all additional data collected as agreed in the contract such as Number of Families served, Number of
Projects Completed, Number of Program Hours provided, Number of Bed Nights provided, or other Performance Outcome
Measurements. For questions, please call the Housing Division at (619) 441 -1786.
CDBG LOW MOD CLIENTELE NATIONAL OBJECTIVE REPORT
FEDERAL FISCAL YEAR 2020-2021
PROJECT STATUS NARRATIVE
EXH I B IT "C-2"
The purpose of this form is to report accomplishment data for the project named below. This form must be completed for projects providing
eligible CDBG/HOME activities to Low to Moderate Income residents of the City of El Cajon. This form must be completed and submitted
with each monthly/quatierly Periodic Performance Report
AGENCY NAME: E􀀎-t Co􀀄±½ '\....-s :-+􀀑c.-0 L 􀀃 v 􀀄
:J
􀀂+􀀃
PROJECT NAME: G,JVV2.A..,􀀉􀀊 􀀋L....&b., '?"\C,"Q--,...- F y ;2.0 ,0 - ?.-I
REPORTING PERIOD:
PREPARED BY:
NAME PHONE
PROJECT STATUS : Pending D Active D Complete D Date: -------
PROJECT STATUS NARRATIVE:
SUBJ ECT :
REFEREN C E :
PURPOS E
CITY OF EL CAJON
CITY COUNCIL POLI CY
I nsura n ce Requ i rements
Adopted 7 /26/94
Amended 1 1 /29/05
Amended 04/1 4/1 5
EXHI BIT D
POLICY
D-3
EFFECTIVE PAGE
04/1 4/1 5 1 of 8
To provide a u niform City policy for liability insurance requirements and to establish procedures for
its con sistent applicatio n .
BACKGROUND
To help p rotect the C ity against liability, all i nd ivid uals, contractors, agencies and organizations
conducting b usiness in association with, on behalf of, or in certai n circumstances within the City of
El Cajon are req u i red to mainta i n adequate liability insurance coverage acceptable to the C ity.
Because of the differing levels of protection needed for various activities conducted within the City,
the City has established policy limits and standards which d irectly relate to the type of activity
being con d u cted .
POLICY
All individuals, contractors, agencies, and organization s conducting business either for the City of
El Cajon (or the Successor Agency to the El Cajon Redevelopment Agen cy) or p u rsuant to an
ordina nce, resolutio n , agreement or policy req uiring the maintenance of liability insurance shall
provide p roof of liability insurance i n the followin g amounts and written o n a n occurrence basis
(claims made coverage will be accepted o n ly after verifying that occurrence coverage is not
available) :
1 . A combined single limit policy with aggregate limits in the amou nt of $2 million for all
construction p rojects a n d for carnivals, subdivisions, and pollution coverage subject to
section 5.c. u nder the heading " I NS U RANCE STANDARDS," with a m1:1ximum deductible
or self-insurance retention ("SIR") of $500,000; for policies n ot having a "combined single
limit," minimum l imits in amounts as follows:
Commercial General Liability (CGL): I nsurance Services Office Form CG 00 01 covering
CGL on a n "occurrence" basis, including products and completed operations, property
damage, bodily i nj u ry and personal & advertising injury with limits n o less than $ 1 ,000,000
per occu rrence. If a general aggregate limit a pplies , either the general aggregate limit shall
apply separately to this project/location or the general aggregate limit shall be twice the
required occu rren ce limit.
U n less staff determines that .circumstances (i.e. high risk project, etc.) requ ire the higher
limit, the $2 ,000 ,000 limit shall be decreased to $1 ,000,000 with a maximum deductible or
S I R of $ 1 50,000, when:
SUBJ ECT :
REFERENCE :
CITY O F EL CAJ O N
CITY COU N C I L P OLICY
I nsura n ce Requirements
Adopted 7 /26/94
Amended 1 1 /29/05
Ame nded 04/1 4/1 5
EX,HllllT O
POLICY
D-3
E F F E CTIVE PAG E
04/1 4/1 5 2 of 8
a. The p u blic improvements portion of a subdivision project is less than $50,000; or
b. A construction p roject (in accordance with the Standard Specifications for Public
Works Construction-and the Standard S pecial Provisions, the "Green Book") is for
less tha n $50,000.
2 . Except as otherwise p rovided in this policy, a combined single limit policy with aggregate
limits in the amount of $ 2 million for all others, including, b ut not limited to, athletic leagues,
recreation g roups, towing compan ies and public service agencies; for policies not having a
"combined single limit/' minimum limits in amou nts as fol lows:
Commercial General Liability (CGL): I nsurance Services Office Form CG 00 0 1 covering
CGL on an "occurrence" basis, including products and completed operations, property
damage, bodily i njury and personal & advertisi n g i njury with limits no less than $ 1 , 000,000
per occurrence. If a g e neral aggregate limit applies, either the general aggregate limit shall
apply separately to this project/location or the general aggregate limit shall be twice the
req u i red occurrence l imit.
3 . A combined single limit policy with aggregate limits i n the amo u nt o f $250,000 fo r
homeowners insura n ce or $500,000 for commercial genera l liability i nsura n ce for small
business owners, in either event only where the insura nce is required for work i n the public
right-of-way. "Small business owners" are defi ned as commercial businesses, or a
professional or administrative office uses, where the owners of the b usiness work on-site
as their p rimary calling or vocation , and having no more than two (2) employees not related
by blood or marriage.
4. Selected high-risk activities that would otherwise fall under the criteria for category 2 shall
be evaluated by staff on a case-by-case basis to determine whether or not the above limits
a re sufficient. The imposition of liability limits exceeding $2 million for such high-risk
a ctivities is appealable to the C ity Council.
5 . $ 1 ,000,000 for taxicab comp a n ies.
6 . $500,000 or actual value, whichever i s g reater, for "valuable papers" a n d " i n tran sit"
insurance where C ity records or personal property is being transported or stored outside of
City p roperty.
EXHIBIT D
SUBJECT :
REFERENCE : .
C I TY O F EL CAJ O N
C ITY COU N C I L POLICY
I nsurance Requ i rements
Adopted 7 /26/94
Amended 1 1 /29/05
Amended 04/1 4/1 5
POLICY
D-3
EFFECTIVE PAG E
04/1 4/1 5 3 of 8
7. Exceptions to the above limits may be made for n o n-profit, charitable, political, commu nity
and reli g ious organizations.
8 . The policy or policies o f insura n ce may be for a l l operations or activities o f the party
purchasing the policy or policies provided, however, that the C ity or the Successor Agency
may require a separate policy exclusively for operations of the purchaser where the City
Manager, i n h is or her sole d iscretion , determines that a s ingle policy would be inadequate
to protect the City or S uccessor Agen cy in the event of multiple catastrophes.
9. Workers' compensation insu ra nce shall meet the m inimum limits requ i red by law.
I NS U RANC E STANDARDS
1 . ADM ITTED CARR I E R / B EST'S RATING A, CLASS VI I
a. I nsurers must be "admitted" carriers pursuant to the p rovisions of the Californ i a
I nsurance Code and i n accordance with a l l requirements o f t h e State Insura nce
Commission a n d must be listed in the:
"OFFICIAL P U B LI CATIO N
D E PARTMENT OF I N S U RANCE
STATE OF CALI FORNIA
45 Fremont Street
San Francisco, California 941 05
INSURANC E ORGAN IZATIONS AUTHORIZED BY THE I N S U RANCE
COMM I S S I O N TO TRANSACT BUSI N ESS OF I NSURANCE
IN THE STATE OF CALI FORNIA DURI NG
[the most recent yea r for wh ich
the publication is available] ."
or
"California Department of I nsura nce Company Profile."
SUBJECT :
C I TY OF E L CAJON
CITY COUNC I L POLICY
Insura n ce Requ irements
EXHIBIT D
POLICY
D-3
REFERE NC E : Adopted 7 /26/94 E FF ECTIVE PAG E
Amended 1 1 /29/05
Amended 04/1 4/1 5 04/1 4/1 5 4 of 8
b . I nsurers m ust h ave a Best's rating of A , Class V I I o r h igher (this rating incl udes
those insurers with a minimum policyholder's surplus of $50 to $ 1 00 million).
Exceptions to the Best's ratin g may be considered when an insurance carrier meets
all other standards and can satisfy surplus amounts equ iva lent to an A, Class VI I
ratin g . An exception to the rating req u i rement may be made for the California State
Compe nsation I nsurance Fund if not rated .
2 . NON-ADMITTED CAR R I ER / BEST'S RAT I N G A, Class XI I
Exceptions to the "admitted" req u i rement may be considered when a non-admitted
insura nce carrier meets all other standards herein and:
a. is either (i) listed i n :
California Department o f Insu rance
List of Approved S u rplus Line I nsu rers
LISTI NG OF F I L INGS
or (ii) is currently a party to co-operation agreements with foreign i nsura nce
reg u latory a uthorities acceptable to the C ity Manager or C ity Attorney (for example,
for i nsu rers located in the U nited Kingdom, agreements must be with both the
Prudential Regu latory Authority ("PRA") and the Financial Conduct Authority ("FCA"),
or such successor authority or authorities of P RA and FCA;
b. e ither the carrier or its parent company has a Best's rating of A, Class VI I (this rating
include those insurers with a minimum policyholder's surplus of $50 to $ 1 00 millio n ;
c. h as ten years or more experience in the business of insura nce; a n d
d. if applicable, the reinsurance carrier has a qualified ratin g .
3 . G E N E RAL - I NS U RANCE C ERTI FICATES / ADDITIONAL I NS U R E D
All insurers (including those insuring against pollution or d ischarges o f hazardous
materials) must provide certificates of insurance and endorsements evidencing coverage
prior to the start of a ny contract. All certificates or e n dorsements must i nclude:
SUBJ E CT :
CITY OF E L CAJON
C I TY COUN C I L POLICY
Insura n ce Req uirements
EXH I BIT D
POLICY
D-3
REFERENCE : Adopted 7/26/94 E F FECTIVE PAG E
Amended 1 1 /29/05
Amended 04/1 4/1 5
• Name of insura n ce company issu ing each policy.
04/1 4/1 5 5 of 8
All insurers m ust provide a n original endorsement naming the City of El Cajon
(and/or the Successor Agency to the El Cajon Redevelopment Agency) , and its
(their) elected and appointed officials, officers, employees and volunteers (for
purposes of this P olicy, individually a n d collect ive ly, the "C ity I n s u reds") as
add itio n a l i n s u re d s . T h is i n cl u s i o n a s add itional insureds shall not be required of
Workers' Compensation or professional liability policies of insura nce, and may be
waived for "valuable papers" coverage with the approval of the City Attorney.
• All insurers m ust provide an original endorsement stating that the insura nce
coverage shall be primary insurance as respects the City of El Cajon (and/or the
Successor Age n cy to the El Cajon Redevelopment Agency) , and its (their) elected
and appointed officials, officers, employees and volunteers (for purposes of this
Policy, individ ually and collectively, the "City Insureds. Any insurance or selfinsurance
mainta i ned by the E ntity, its officers, officials, employees, or volunteers
shall be excess of the Contractor's insura n ce and shall not contribute with it.
• Waiver of S u b rogation endorsement is req uired on Workers' Compensation
Coverage.
, • Address of named insured .
• Description of coverage, including any special coverage required by the contract.
• Policy n umbers.
• Policy periods ( If claims made basis, must i nclude retroactive date and length of
time allowed as extended reporting period).
• Coverage type (occurrence form vs. claims made).
• Authorized sig n ature and date of issuance. An original sign ature is required : a
digital sign ature is acceptable so long as it complies with the req uirements of
Government Code § 1 6.5.
• U nless approved by the City Manager o r designee, no certificate shall be accepted
that q u alifies the obligation of the carrier to provide 30 days written notice of
cancellation of the policy. With the approval of the City Attorney the obligation to
provide n otice of cancellation may be reduced to ten ( 1 0) days , but only for
termination d ue to the non-payment of any premiu m .
SUBJECT :
REFERENCE :
CITY OF E L CAJON
CITY C O U N C I L P OLICY
I nsurance Requirements
Adopted 7 /26/94
Amended 1 1 /29/05
Amended 04/1 4/1 5
EXH I B IT D
POLICY
D-3
E F FECTIVE PAG E
04/1 4/1 5 6 of 8
4 . PUBLIC WORKS P ROJECTS
In add ition to the standa rds set forth above, insurance policies for p u blic works projects
m ust also meet the following insurance requ irements set out in the most recent edition of
the Green Book adopted by the C ity Council:
a. All insurance certificates shall bear an endorsement or s h a ll have attached a rider
whereby it is provided that, in the event of expiration or proposed cancellation of
such policy for any reason whatsoever, the City shall be n otified by certified mail,
return receipt requested , g iving a sufficient time before the date thereof to comply
with any applicable law or statute, but in n o event less than th irty (30) days before
expiration or cancellation is effective, the provisions of section 3 herein
n otwithstanding; and
b . Compliance with Labor Code §§3700 a n d 3800 relating t o Workers' Compensation .
c. Requirements of the G reen Book s hall prevail.
5. P U B L IC RIGHT-OF-WAY
An applicant for permit(s) to d o work within the public right-of-way may establish
satisfactory p roof of l iability insurance in the following manner:
a. CONTRACTORS
Contractors must furnish the City with a certificate of liability insurance, which meets
the requirements set forth a bove and any other City requ irements contained in this
policy.
b. HOMEOWNERS / PROPERTY OWNERS
Homeowners/Property owners requesting a permit to do work within City rights-ofway
or easements immediately adjacent to their respective owned or occup ied
p roperty, solely for the owner's personal benefit, shall be req uired to furnish the City
with a copy of their homeowner's/property owner's liability insurance policy, which
meets the req u irements set forth above, with the minimum limits described in
category 3 u nder the head ing "POLICY," above. The policy must be effective d u ring
the entire period of the proposed work, plus two (2) calendar years, and must
p rovide coverage for claims arising from the work performed, or improvements
owned , by the homeowner in the rig ht-of-way or easement. If the encroachment is
SUBJ ECT :
REFERENCE :
CITY OF EL CAJON
CITY COUNCIL POLICY
I nsura n ce Requirements
Adopted 7 /26/94
Amended 1 1 /29/05
Amended 04/1 4/1 5
E X H I B IT D
POLICY
D-3
E F FECTIVE PAGE
04/1 4/1 5 7 of 8
ongoing, a n nu al proof of insurance shall be req uired. The requirement to name the
C ity as an additional insured , and the requ i rement for a policy for two (2) additional
calendar years, may each be waived by the City Council o r the City Manager (or her
designee) i n cases of extreme h a rdship, in their d iscretion.
c. POLLUTIO N EXCLUSION
Applications for the installation of mon itoring wells for the evaluation of g roundwater
pollution or for the disch a rge of formerly polluted g ro u n dwater i nto the City sewer
system must be accompanied by a certificate of liability insurance provided by the
property owner. Such l iability insurance may n ot contain a pollution exclusion clause
and must expl icitly indemnify the City against all hazards wh ich may result from
either of these activities, including a worsen ing of pollution, either withi n the
subsurface adjacent to the original pollution o r within the City sewer system.
If the property owner is u n able to provide insurance which addresses both genera l
liability a n d poll ution liabil ity, t h e enviro n mental company or othe r appropriately
qualified entity contracting with the property owner for either monitoring wel l
installation o r g roundwater pollution remediation , may furnish pollution liability
insurance on behalf of the property owner.
Any i nsura n ce approved u nder this subsection c. shall be an occurrence policy, and
shall otherwise comply with the provisions of this Policy.
d. PU BLIC UTI LITI ES
This policy a s it relates to work in the public rig hts-of-way shall not be applicab le to
Cable TV, Helix Water District, Padre Dam M u n icipal Water District, SBC, S a n
D iego Gas & E lectric, or any other p u blic utility.
e. TRANSPORTATION / OVERSIZE LOADS - PERMITS - See Chapter 1 0.24 of the
El Cajon M u nicipal Code.
SUBJECT :
REFERENCE :
C ITY O F EL CAJON
C I TY COUNCIL POLICY
I nsurance Requ irements
Adopted 7 /26/94
Amended 1 1 /29/05
Amended 04/1 4/1 5
TIME LIMITS / CANCELLATIO N PROVISIONS
EXH I BIT D
POLICY
D-3
E FF ECTIVE PAGE
04/1 4/1 5 8 of 8
All liability insura n ce req u ired pursuant to this policy shall provide coverage for a sufficient time
period to protect the City from liability. The insurer is required to provide a minimum of thirty (30)
days-n otice of cancellation of any policy. With the approval of the City Attorney (except as
p rovided in section 4, herein) this obligation may be red uced to not less than ten ( 1 0) days written
n otice, but only for termination d u e to the non-payment of any premi u m . In no event shall a policy
be accepted which termi nates prior to the completion of the activity to be covered .
I n certain circumstances, it may be impracticable to obtai n conti nuing insurance coverage due to
the d u ration of the activity or the cost of premature renewal. Under such circumstances , a n
exception to t h e coverage period may be made s o long as t h e policy i s renewed o r replaced with
an acceptable insu ra nce carrier and there is no lapse in coverage . M a intenance of proper
insurance coverage is a material term of any contract with the City a n d failure to mainta i n or
renew coverage o r to p rovide evidence of renewal may be treated as a material breach of
contract.
ALTERNATIVE RISK MANAGEMENT PRACTICES: SELF-INSURANCE; RISK-POOLING
Alternative risk management practices, such as self-insurance, risk pooling, risk retention groups,
and other such programs, will be accepted i n lieu of commercial i nsura n ce policies provided that
the cove rage meets the requirements of this Policy. Any such a lternative risk management
p ractices must meet the financial stre ngth and surplus requirements reflected by the Best's
Ratings requ ired of commercial insurance u nder this Policy.
I N S U RAN C E C H EC KLIST
Acceptable insurance certificates must meet the following requirements:
If I nsura nce Company is an Adm itted Carrier:
o Best's rating of A VI I or better
o Licensed in the State of California OR listed as S u rplus
If I nsura n ce Compa ny is a Non-Adm itted Carrier:
o I n cluded on the California Department of I ns u rance List of Approved S u rplus Line
I ns u rers (LASL I )
http://www.insurance.ca.gov
o Best's Rating of at least a A VI I
o Has 1 0 years or more experience
o If applicable, the rei n s u rance carrier has a q ualified rating
Requirements for a l l carriers :
Amount listed on policy m ust be an aggregate amou nt of $2 , 0 0 0 , 000 un less determ ined by
a uthorized staff that the amount can be red uced to $ 1 ,000 , 000 per Policy D-3 .
P rovide a n original signature O R electronic signature on emailed certificates (stam ped and
faxed sig n atures are NOT acceptable) .
I nclude specific description of p roject or job req u i ring coverage on the certificate.
P rovide endorsement page specifically n a m i n g the City of El Cajon as add itional i n s u red
to i nclude the following language: "City of El Cajon (and/or the Successor Agency to the El
Caion Redevelopment Agency), its (their) elected and appointed officials, officers. employees
and volunteers (for purposes of this Policy, individually and collectively, the 'City Insureds') . "
A blanket endorsement is NOT acceptable.
Per Policy D-3 , C ity shall be notified of expiration or p roposed cancellation of insura n ce policy
not less than 30 days before expiration or cancel lation is effective. Public Works p rojects
u s i ng Green Book specifications req u i re notification of expi ration or p roposed cancellation of
i n su rance policy not less than 30 days before expi ration or cancellation is effective by certified
m a i l , return receipt req uested (non-payment can be 1 0 days) .
P rofessional Services Agreement companies m u st provide evide n ce of P rofessional Liability
and Worker Compensation coverage.
I/Insurance/Checklist Eff. 1 1 -29-05
EXH IBIT "E"
DECLARATION OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS followingI nq useusbtimonitsti nagre ittrsu ep aronpdo csoarlr,e cSt:U BRECIPIENT represents that SUBRECIPIENT's responses to the
1. Tsihtee. proposed public project may affect the market value of real property in the vicinity of the project
a.
b.
C.
hDaovees ath ef inSaUnBciRalE iCnItPeIrEesNtT i no rr eaanly opnroep ienr ttyh el oScUatBeRdE wCiIthPiInE N2T50's0 o fregaent iozfa ttihone Yes □ ro·ect site?
rHeansd ethreed S pUroBfResEsCioInPaIEl sNeTr voicr easn cyoonncee irnn itnhge rSeaUl BpRroEpCerIPtyI EloNcTat'se do rwgiathniinz a2t5io0n0, feet of the ro·ect site? □ rHeacse ivtheed SinUcBoRmEeC frIPomIE NreTa lo rp raonpyeorntye thina tt hies lSoUcaBtRedE CwIiPthIiEnN 2T5's0 0o rfgeaent izoaf ttihoen ro·ect site? □
a. hDaovees ath fein aSnUcBiaRl EinCteIPreIEstN inT ao rb uasniynoenses ilno ctahete dS UwBithRiEn C2I5P0I0E NfeTe'ts o of rtghaen pizraotjieocnt site? □ b. rHeansd ethreed S pUroBfResEsCioInPaIEl NseTr voicr easn cyoonncee irnn itnhge aS bUuBsRinEesCsI PthIEaNt iTs' slo ocragtaendi zwaittihoinn 2500 feet of the ro·ect site? □ c. rHeacse itvheed SinUcBoRmEeC fIrPoImEN aT bours ainneysosn eth iant tihse loScUaBteRdE wCiItPhIinEN· 2T5'0s0 o fregaent iozaf ttihoen ro·ect site? □ 3. Dmoeemsb aenr ywohnoe h ians SaU fiBnRanEcCiaIlP iInEteNrTe'sst ionr gaann izsautciohn r ehaal ver oa esrpt ouosr eb uosri noetshse?r family □
SUBRECIPIENT'S SIGNATURE
East County Transitional Living Center, Inc.
This document is signed by an individual clearly authorized to bind SUBRECIPIENT.
Date: /; - / f3- - cft>c;)J
EXHIBIT "F"
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
WITH 2 CFR PART 200, SUBPART F (FORMERLY 0MB CIRCULAR A-1 33)
AUDITS OF STATES, LOCAL GOVERNMENTS AND
NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS
CFDA No. for this Grant/Agreement: 1 4.21 8 (Community Development Block Grant)
Nspoenc-iFfiec daeurdailt ecnotnitdieusc ttheadt feoxr ptheantd y $e7a5r 0in,0 a0c0c oorr dmaonrcee iwn iath y tehaer pinro Fveisdioenrasl oafw ards shall have a single or program2
CFR Part 200, Subpart F. complete the following by placing an "X" in the appropriate box. Please
□ expended $750,000 or more in
Federal funds during the prior fiscal year (FY 2019-20)/calendar year (2019).
􀀒 􀀎-t 􀀏t, i'􀀐 +J L:v􀀑 􀂷-t. did not expend $750,000 or more in
Federal funds during the prior fiscal year (FY 2019-20)/calendar year (2019).
Iw HithE RthEeB pYr oCvEisRioTnIsF Yo fI 0haMvBe tChierc auulathr oAri-t1y3 t3o asnigdn afonry thoeth aebr oavpep lnicaambeled Faegdeenrcayl aanndd tShtaatt eth lea wagse anncdy wreigll ucloamtiopnlsy hereinafter enacted.
By:
Title:
Date:
tf A:a'> le( B C6 􀀒 , J Print Name
EXHIBIT "G"
WORKER'S COMPEN SATION INSU RANCE CERTIFICATE
The Subrecipient shall execute the following form as required by the California Labor Code,
Sections 1 860 and 1 86 1 .
I am aware of the provision of Section 3700 of the Labor Code which requires every employer to
be insured against liability for worker's compensation or to undertake self-insurance in
accordance with the provisions of that code, and I will comply with such provisions before
commencing the performance of the work of this contract.
East County Transitional Living Center, Inc.
By: ;JJ .