AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE CITY OF EL CAJON AND
East County Transitional Living Center, Inc.
THIS AGREEMENT is made and entered into 􀃷􀃸t::.:r􀃹􀃺- day of _______ , 2020, by and
between the CITY OF EL CAJON, a charter city and municipal corporation, hereinaf er eferred to as "City," and
East County Transitional Living Center, Inc., a nonprofit organization under the laws of the State of California,
hereinafter referred to as "Subrecipient";
WHEREAS, there exists a need within the City of El Cajon to provide a variety of services, including
housing, recreational, educational, and child care services and developmental programs [Note: We should
probably expand this list of examples to reflect the COVID-19 grant uses]; and
WHEREAS, the Subrecipient has expressed a desire and has the expertise and experience to operate
the program entitled "Emergency Shelter" in El Cajon; and
WHEREAS, the City has entered into a contract with the United States of America through its Department
of Housing and Urban Development, hereinafter called HUD, to execute the City's Community Development Block
Grant, hereinafter called CDBG, program under the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as
amended, hereinafter called the "Act"; and
WHEREAS, the City anticipates receiving one-time Cares Act Community Development Block Grant
("CDBG-CV") entitlement grant funds from HUD for FY 2019-20 in the amount of $802,656, which is intended to
be used to prevent, prepare for, and respond to the impacts of the coronavirus on residents through efforts such
as the Emergency Shelter.
1.
2.
NOW, THEREFORE, IT IS HEREBY MUTUALLY AGREED by and between the parties hereto as follows:
City Review:
The City reserves the right to review and approve actions and decisions taken by the Subrecipient with
respect to the operation of the Emergency Shelter for compliance with all applicable regulations.
Subrecipient Status:
The City recognizes the Subrecipient as an independent nonprofit organization and agrees to cooperate
in protecting its image as a politically neutral organization.
3. Service Area:
4.
The Service area is City-wide in the City of El Cajon.
Scope of Services:
The Subrecipient shall perform all services described in the project description and Scope of Work and
Budget set forth as Exhibit "A" to this Agreement, a copy of which is attached hereto and incorporated
herein by this reference.
5. Time of Performance:
6.
7.
Said services of the Subrecipient are to commence no sooner than May 13, 2020 and shall be completed
no later than June 30, 2021.
Compensation and Method of Payment:
The City shall reimburse the Subrecipient for allowable costs incurred under the scope of the Agreement
and applicable Federal regulations, which have not been paid for or reimbursed in any other manner by
any other Agency or private source of funding. The total of all reimbursements shall not exceed
One Hundred Eighty Five Thousand Two Hundred Ninety Four Dollars and no/100s dollars
($185,294).
Compliance with Laws and Assurances:
The Subrecipient hereby assures and certifies that it has complied with and will continue to comply with
the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, hereinafter called the Act, and all current and
future applicable federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, regulations, policies, guidelines, and
requirements as they relate to acceptance and use of Federal funds for this federally assisted program.
This Agreement is subject to all such laws, ordinances, regulations, policies, guidelines, and requirements
including without limitation, the Act, Title 2, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 200; Title 24, Code of
8.
9.
10.
Federal Regulations, Part 570; Title 29 Code of Federal Regulations, Parts 3 and 5; Title 24 Code of
Federal Regulations Part 70 and Public Law 87-581.
Records Retention:
The Subrecipient shall maintain and retain all financial records, supporting documents, statistical records
and all other records pertaining to the use of the funds provided under this Agreement for a period of four
(4) years at a minimum, and in the event of litigation, claim or audit, the records shall be retained until all
litigation, claims, and audit findings involving the records have been fully resolved. Records for nonexpendable
property acquired with Federal funds provided under this Agreement shall be retained for four
(4) years after the final disposition of such property.
Monitoring:
The City will conduct periodic program monitoring reviews. These reviews will focus on the extent to which
the planned program has been implemented, measurable goals achieved, effectiveness of program
management, and impact of the program. Authorized representatives of the City and HUD shall have the
right of access to all activities and facilities operated by the Subrecipient under this Agreement. Facilities
include all files, records, and other documents relat.ed to the performance of this Agreement. Activities
include attendance at staff, board of directors, advisory committee, and advisory board meetings and
inspection by City and HUD representatives, and to ensure that its employees and board members furnish
such information, as in the judgment of City and HUD representatives, may be relevant to the question of
compliance with contractual conditions and HUD directives, or the effectiveness, legality and
achievements of the program.
Program Reporting:
The Subrecipient agrees to prepare and submit financial, program progress, evaluations, and other
reports as required by HUD or the City. The Subrecipient shall maintain such program, property,
personnel, financial and other records and accounts as are considered necessary by HUD or the City to
Easxshuibrei tp "roBp"e r accounting for all Contract funds. Sub-recipient shall submit all financial requirements in (Request for Payment forms). All of the Subrecipient's records, with the exception of
confidential client information, shall be made available to representatives of the City and the appropriate
Federal agencies. The Subrecipient is required to submit data necessary to complete the Annual
Subrecipient Performance Report and other federal documents in accordance with HUD regulations and
in the format and at the time designated by the City. Subrecipient shall submit a Periodic Performance
Report (Exhibit "C") for the reporting period (may be either monthly or quarterly, as agreed to with the
City at time of contract execution) by the 10th day of the month following the reporting period. The reports
shall include the following information:
A Number of individual clients served (individual client may be a person or a household)
B. Race of clients served
C. Ethnicity of clients served (Hispanic, yes or no - a person may be of any race and be Hispanic)
D. Number of disabled clients served (as defined by the Social Security Administrative Guidelines)
E. Whether or not the head of the household is female
F. Number of clients who are low income (per HUD guidelines)
G. Whether or not the client is an El Cajon resident.
H. Number of new clients assisted.
In addition, a brief narrative must accompany the report (Exhibit "C-2"). The narrative should include
(but is not limited to) the following:
A Outreach methods used;
B. Number and disposition of complaints received; and
C. Progress made toward goals as evidenced in Exhibit "A", or an explanation of lack thereof.
D. Any other accomplishments or problems/concerns the Agency wishes to report.
2
11. Accounting:
The Subrecipient must establish and maintain on a current basis, an adequate accrual and accounting
system in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and standards. The City, the Federal
Grantor Agency, the Comptroller General of the United States, or any of their duly-authorized
representatives, shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of the Subrecipient
which directly pertain to the above project for the purpose of audit, examination, excerpts and
transcriptions.
12. Audits:
13.
The Subrecipient is required to arrange for an independent financial and compliance audit annually for
each fiscal year Federal funds are received under this contract. Audits must be in compliance with 2 CFR
Part 200, Subpart F. (Exhibit "F"). An audit may be conducted by Federal, State, or local funding source
agencies as part of the City's audit responsibilities. The Subrecipient shall forward a copy of the
independent audit to the City for review within thirty (30) days of its completion. Within thirty (30)
days of the submittal of said audit report, the Subrecipient shall provide a written response to all conditions
or findings reported in said audit report. The response must examine each condition or finding and explain
a proposed resolution, including a schedule for correcting any deficiency. All correction actions related to
conditions or findings shall take place within six (6) months after receipt of the audit report.
The City's authorized representatives shall at all times, have access for the purpose of audit or inspection,
to any and all books, documents, papers, records, property and premises of the Subrecipient.
Subrecipient staff will cooperate fully with authorized auditors when they conduct audits and examinations
of the Subrecipient's program. If indications of misappropriation or misapplication of the funds of this
Agreement cause the City to require a special audit, the cost of the audit will be encumbered and deducted
from the Subrecipient's CDBG award. Should the special audit confirm misappropriation or misapplication
of funds, the Subrecipient shall reimburse the City the amount of the misapplication or misappropriation.
In the event the City uses the judicial system to recover misappropriated or misapplied funds, the
Subrecipient shall reimburse the City for legal fees and court costs in addition to awards.
Beneficiary Qualification:
The Subrecipient agrees to guarantee that at least fifty-one percent (51 %) of the beneficiaries of the
program identified in Exhibit "A," Scope of Work and Budget, are low and moderate income persons or
households. Under the CDBG regulations, the following clienteles are presumed to be low and moderate
income persons and can qualify for service regardless of income: abused children, elderly persons,
battered spouses, homeless persons, disabled persons, illiterate persons, and migrant farm workers.
Beneficiaries qualifying on the basis of income shall have an annual income equal to or less than the
current applicable Income Limits schedule published by HUD for the San Diego MSA, which defines the
maximum income for low and moderate income households. The Subrecipient is responsible for obtaining
the current applicable HUD Income Limits schedule for each year of the Agreement term identified in
Paragraph 6, Time of Performance. The Subrecipient shall retain these forms for three (3) years after
conclusion of the Agreement.
14. Assignment:
This Agreement is not assignable by the Subrecipient without the express prior written consent of the City
Council. Consent shall be given at the sole discretion of the City Council. Any attempt by the Subrecipient
to assign any performance of the terms of this Agreement shall be null and void and shall constitute a
material breach of this Agreement upon which the City may, among other remedies, and without limitation,
cancel, terminate, or suspend this Agreement.
15. Termination and Termination Costs:
This Agreement may be terminated in whole or in part at any time by either party upon giving thirty (30)
days written notice to the other party. Agreement must be reached by both parties as to reasons and
conditions for termination in compliance with the provisions of Title 2 Code of Federal Regulations Part
200. The City Manager is hereby empowered to give said notice subject to ratification by the City Council.
The City may immediately terminate this Agreement upon the termination, suspension, discontinuation,
or substantial reduction in CDBG funding for the Contract activity or if for any reason the timely completion
of the work under this Agreement is rendered improbable, infeasible, or impossible. If the Subrecipient
materially fails to comply with any term of this Agreement, the City may take one of more of the actions
provided under 2 CFR Part 200, which includes temporarily withholding cash, disallowing, noncompliance
3
16.
cleogsatslly, wahvaoilllayb oler . pIanr tsiaulclyh teevrmenint, atthineg S thueb raewciapriedn, tw sihthahllo bldein cgo mfuptuernes aawteadr dfosr, aalnl ds eortvhiceer sr ermeneddeieresd t haantd a arell nhaevcee sbseaerinly pinrecuviroreuds lyc orsetism pbeurrfsoermd, etdo inth eg odoadt efa oitfh sina ida ctceormrdiannactieo nw titoh tthhee etexrtmenst othf atht isC DAgBrGe efmunednst tahraet available from HUD.
Program Income:
A sPhroagll rbaem r eintacionmede bdye ftihnee dS uabsr ethcaipt iemnot.n ey generated from the CDBG funds received herein, and
B. pTrhoev isSiounbsre ocfi pthieisn tA sghreaell muetinlitz seh athlle a ppprolyg rtoa mth ein dcisopmoes itiino na ocfc porrdoagnracme iwncitohm Eex. hibit "A" and all
C. Disposition of program income shall be done in accordance with Paragraph 18 of this Agreement.
17. Reversion of Assets:
18.
Ufoprtohnw tithhe treaxnpsirfaetri oton tohre t eCrimtyi,n aantiyo nC oDfB thGis f uAngdrse eomn ehnatn, dfo ar ta tnhye rteimaseo onf wshucahts oexepvierar,t itohne oSru tberremciinpaietinotn s ahnadll ianncyo macec. oFuunrtths erre, caeniyv arbelael partotrpibeurttya bulned teor tthhee cuosnetr oolf oCf DthBe GS ufubnredcsi piinecnltu tdhinagt wwaisth aocuqt uliirmedita otiro inm, pprorovgerda min owbhjoelcet ivoer si ns peat rfto wrthith i nC DTiBtleG 2fu4n dCsF Rin e5x7c0e.2s0s8 o, f o$r2 a5n,0y0 0su schcaelsl sboer: s(ata) tuutsee, du tnot ilm feiveet o(5n)e yoefa trhse anftaetrio tnhael aepxppirroaptiroiant eo br yt ethrme iCniatyti oant itosf stohlee dAisgcrereetmioenn; to, r o(br ) fdoirs psouscehd loofn igne ar mpearnionde ro thf atitm rees ualsts dine ttehrem Ciniteyd's btoe inbge arettirmibbuutarsbeled tion ethxep eanmdoituurnet so of ft hneo nc-uCrDreBnGt f afuirn mdsa frokre at cvqauluisei toiof nr eoaf,l oprr oimpeprrtoyv leemsse natn tyo psourcthio nre oalf pthroep veartluy.e
Independent Contractor:
Tash ea gpeanrttise,s e hmeprelotoy eine sth, ep apretrnfeorrsm, ajonicnet voef nthtuisr eArgs,r eoer maessnot cwiaillt ebse oafc otinneg iann aonth ienrd. eTpheen deemnpt lcoaypeaecsi toyr a angde nnotst pouf ropnoes ep awrhtya tsshoaellv enro.t be deemed or construed to be the agent or employees of the other party for any
19. Insurance:
20.
rTehqeu iSreudb rheecripeiuenndt esrh ianl l an eciothmepr acnoym omr ecnocmep wanoireks u ancdceerp tthaibs leA gtore tehme eCnitt yu nntoilr its hhaalsl tohbet aSinuebdre aclilp iinesnut raalnlocwe haanys bsuebecno onbtrtaaicnteodr .t o commence work on a subcontract until all insurance required of the subcontractor
Tevhied eSncuibnrge cthipei ecnotv esrhaaglel aags rsepee ctoifi epdr oinv iEdle C aanjo na Ccciteyp Ctaobulen ccil eProtifliiccya tDe -3o,f Ininssuurarannccee R eaqnudi reemndeonrtsse, mwehnicths sisu bajtetacct htoe da phperroevtoa l absy CExIThYib aits "toD "fo ramnd a nmda cdoen ate npta. rt of this Agreement. All insurance policies shall be
sSeurbvriececisp uienndt esrh tahlils f uArgnrieshe mpreonpte. rSlyu cehx ecceurttiefidc acteer stihficaall:t es of insurance to CITY prior to commencement of
A eCnledaorrlsye meveidnet nnacme inagll CcIoTvYe raangde ists reeleqcutieredd a nadb aopvep,o inintecldu doifnfigce rssp, eocffificicia lesv, iadgeennctes aonf da e mspelpoayreaetes as additionally insureds;
B. Indicate whether coverage provided is on claims-made or occurrence basis;
C. ePxrocevipdte o nth tahti rstyu c(3h0 i)n dsuaryasn pcreio sr hwarlilt tneont nboeti cme,a vteiari afilrlsyt cchlaasnsg meda, ilt etor mCiInTaYte; da,n do r allowed to expire
D. Subrecipient agrees to provide CITY with copies of all required policies upon request.
aSnudb reemcipplioeynet rs'sh aliall baillistyo imnsauirnatanicne Wwiothrk leimr'sit sC oofm npoet nlessast iothna nIn $s2u,r0a0n0c,e0 0(E0x pheirb aitc c"iGde")n tw. ith statutory limits,
No Benefit to Arise to Local Employee:
oNfo t hmee Cmibtye, ra, nodff icneor ,o othr eerm ppulbolyice eo fofifc tihael wChitoy ,e oxre irtcsi sdeess iagnnye efusn ocrt iaognesn otsr , rneos pmoenmsibbielirt ioefs t hweit hg orevseprneicntg t ob othdey
4
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
program during his or her tenure or for one year thereafter, shall have any interest, direct or indirect, in
this Agreement or in any contract or subcontract, or the proceeds thereof, for work to be performed in
connection with the program assisted under this Agreement.
Certification Regarding Lobbying:
The Subrecipient certifies to the best of their knowledge and belief, that:
A. No Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid, by or on behalf of the undersigned,
to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any agency, a
Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress in connection with the awarding of any
Federal contract, the making of any cooperative agreement, and the extension, continuation,
renewal, amendment, or modification of any Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative
agreement.
B. If any funds other than Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid to any person
for influencing or attempting to influence any officer or employee of any agency, a Member of
Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or any employee of a Member of Congress in
connection with this Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement, the undersigned
shall complete and submit Standard Form-LLL, "Disclosure Form to Report Lobbying," in
accordance with its instructions.
C. The Subrecipient shall require that the language of this certification be included in the award
documents for all sub-awards at all tiers (including subcontractors, sub-grantees, and contracts
under grants, loans, and cooperative agreements), and that all Subrecipients shall certify and
disclose accordingly.
Conflict of Interest:
A. Subrecipient covenants that neither it, nor any officer or principal of its firm, has or shall acquire
any interest, directly or indirectly, which would conflict in any manner with the interests of City or
which would in any way hinder Subrecipient's performance of services under this Agreement
Subrecipient further covenants that in the performance of this Agreement, no person having any
such interest shall be employed by it as an officer, employee, agent or subcontractor without the
express written consent of the City Manager. Subrecipient agrees to at all times avoid conflicts of
interest or the appearance of any conflicts of interest with the interests of City in the performance
of this Agreement (also see Exhibit "E").
B. City understands and acknowledges that Subrecipient is, as of the date of execution of this
Agreement, independently involved in the performance of non-related services for other
governmental agencies and private parties. Subrecipient is unaware of any stated position of City
relative to such projects. Any future position of City on such projects shall not be considered a
conflict of interest for purposes of this section.
Use of Funds for Entertainment or Gifts:
The Subrecipient certifies and agrees that it will not use funds provided through this Agreement to pay for
entertainment or gifts.
Joint Funding:
For programs in which there are sources of funds in addition to CDBG funds, the Subrecipient shall
provide proof of such funding. The City shall not pay for any services provided by the Subrecipient which
are funded by other sources. All restrictions and/or requirements provided in this Agreement relative to
accounting, budgeting, and reporting applies to the total program regardless of funding sources.
Changes in Grant Allocation:
The City reserves the right to reduce the grant allocation when the City's fiscal monitoring indicates that
the Subrecipient's rate of expenditure will result in unspent funds at the end of the program year. Changes
in the grant allocation will be done after consultation with the Subrecipient and approval by the City
Council. Such changes shall be incorporated into this Agreement by written amendments.
Fiscal Limitations:
The United States of America through HUD may in the future place programmatic or fiscal limitation(s) on
CDBG funds not presently anticipated. Accordingly, the City reserves the right to revise this Agreement
in order to comply with actions affecting HUD program funding. In the event of funding reduction, the City
5
27.
28.
29.
may reduce limit the Subtrheec ibpuiedngte'st oafu tthheo rAitgy rteoe mcoemnmt aits aan wd hsoplee nodr afusn tdos c, oasnt dc amteagyo rreys, tarincdt tmhea yS autb itrse csiopliee ndti'ssc uresteio onf, breodthu cittsio unn icno fmunmdiitntegd, awnitdh urenssppeecntt ftuon fdusn.d Wingh efroer HthUisD A hgarde edmireecntte, dth oer Creitqyu eMsatenda gtheer oCri thy isto/h iemr pdleemsigennet ea mpuaryp oascet . foTrh eth eC iCtyi tMy ainn aimgpelre omr ehnisti/nhge ra dneds eigffneeceti nmg asyu achc t afo rre tdhuec tCioitny iinn rseuvsispienngd tihneg Athger eoepmereanttio fno ro sf uthche Aingterenetiomne ntot fsoor aucpt .t oIn s nixot ye v(6e0n)t ,d haoyws,e uvepro, ns htharlel ea n(y3 )r edvaiyssio nw rmittaedne n boyti cthee t oC itthye eSffuebcrt eecxippieenndt itoufr ehsis /ahnedr tlehgaat llsyu bcihn dainmgo cuonmtsm hitamveen tbse mena dceo bmym thitete Sdu binr egcoipoiedn fta bitehf oaren dit raercee ivoethde nrwotiiscee oafll osuwcahb rlee vaisniodn ,t hparot vsiduechd commitments are consistent with HUD cash withdrawal guidelines.
Purchase and Invoice Deadlines:
pPeurrfcohrmasaen coef peeqruioipdm aenndt aolrl epqruoippemrteyn mt builslst abree ctoo mbep lpeateidd bbeefoforere t hthee la lsats ttw toh r(e2e) m(3o)n tmhso notfh tsh ios fp tehreio din. itNiaol eoxf ptheen idnaitbialel poer rnfoornm-eaxnpceen pdearbioled purnolpeessrt ya popr reoqvueipdm bye ntht eis C toit yb ein p wurrictihnags. eIndv douicreinsg f othre a flli noabl litgharetieo n(3s) i nmcounrrtehds duanydse ra tfhteisr Athger eineimtiaeln pt emrfuosrmt baen scueb pmeirtitoedd tteor tmhein Rateiodne vdealtoep omr ethnet ay nmda Hyo nuosti nbge D heopnaorrtemde. nEtx wciethpitnio snisx tyto ( 6th0e) preceding limitations require prior written approval by the City.
Invoices will not be honored unless and until periodic reports are current.
Non-expendable Property:
AC DreBcGo rfdu nshdas.ll Tbhei sm raeicnotardin sehda blly b teh ep rSouvbidreedc iptoie tnhte f oCri teya acsh witeemll a osf bneoinn-ge xapveaniladbablele f oprr oinpsepretyc taiocnq uainredd a wuidthit bay u stheefu Cl liitfye uopf omno rreea tshoanna obnlee (n1o)t iyceea. rN aonnd- eaxnp aecnqduaibsilteio pnr ocopsetr toyf moneea nthso tuasnagnibdl ed opllearrsso (n$a1l, 0p0ro0p.0e0rt)y o hr amvoinrge ppreior ru wnirti.t tTehne a pSpurborveacli poife tnhte s Chiatyll. nUopto pnu crcohmapslee toior na ogrr eeea rtloy tpeurrmchinaasteio nn oonf -tehxisp Aengdreaebmlee pnrto, tpheer tCy iwtyi trheosuetr vthees tChDe BriGgh ftu tnod dse inte cromminpel iathnec efi nwaitl hd aispppolsicitaiobnle o laf wsasi da nndo rne-gexuplaetniodnasb. lDe ipsproopseitriotyn a mcqauy iirnecdlu fodre ,t hbius tp isro ngorta lmim aitendd to, the City taking possession of said non-expendable property.
Expendable Personal Property:
pErxoppeenrdtya. bTleh ep eSrusborneacl ipprieonpte srthya rlel fneorts ptou raclhl taasneg oibrl ea gpreeres oton apl uprrcohpaesrety e oxtpheern dthaabnle n openr-seoxnpaeln pdraobplee rptye rwsiothn aal uCnitiyt .v alue of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more per unit without the prior written approval of the
30. Purchase or Lease of Non-Expendable Property or Equipment:
Tpehres oSnuablr epcroippieenrtty s ohra lel qoubitpamine tnhtr eoev edro ocnuem ethnoteuds abnidds d porliloarr sto ( $p1u,r0c0h0a.s0in0g) ionr ulenaits vinaglu aen. yT nhoen S-euxbpreencdipaiebnlet pshroavlli dpeudr cthoa tshee oCri tyle aasse w feroll ma st hbee inlogw aevsat ilraebslpeo fnosri vines paencdt iorens paonnds aibuled itb uidpdoenr . reTahsiso nianbvelen tnooryti cseh aatll thbee request of the City.
31. Travel and Conference Restrictions:
Tprhoev iSduebdr tehcriopuiegnht tcheisrt Aifigerse aenmde antg. rees that travel and conference expenses will not be paid for by funds
32. Affirmative Action Policy:
CThDeB SGu fburnedcsip isehnat lls phraollv imdea keeq uaa "lg eomodp lfoayitmh"e netf faonrtd t oc aerneseur raed tvhaant caellm pernotje ocptsp ofurtnudneitdie sw hfoorl lym oinro irnit ipeas rta nbdy pwuobmliceant. ioAn "sg; ooddir efacitt hs" oelficfoitrat tiinocnlsu;d easn, db urte iqs uneost tliinmgi teads stois, taadnvceer tifsroinmg inm oinnoer iotyr maonrde mwionmoreitny ocro wmommuennit'ys ootrhgearn oizragtaionnizsa, tcioonnstr athcatot rp groroviudpes a, sloscisatla sntcaete t oo ri nfe tdheer rael cmruinitomreityn ta anndd w polamceenm beunst ionfe mssin aosrsitiisetsa ancned owfoficmee onr.
6
In addition, the Subrecipient shall make every effort to employ residents of the area and shall keep a
record of the positions that have been created directly or as a result of this program.
A Provision of Program Services
(1) The Subrecipient shall not on the ground of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual
orientation, disability or familial status exclude any person from participation in, deny any
person the benefits of, or subject any person to discrimination under any program or
activity funded in whole or in part with CDBG funds.
(2) The Subrecipient shall not under any program or activity funded in whole or in part with
CDBG funds, on the ground of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation,
disability, or familial status:
(a) Deny any facilities, services, financial aid or other benefits provided under the
program or activity.
(b) Provide any facilities, services, financial aid or other benefits which are different
or are provided in a different form from that provided to others under the program
or activity.
(c) Subject to segregated or separate treatment in any facility in, or iii any manner
or process related to receipt of any service or benefit under the program or
activity.
( d) Restrict in any way access to, or in the enjoyment of any advantage or privilege
enjoyed by others in connection with facilities, services, financial aid, or other
benefits under the program or activity.
(e) Treat an individual differently from others in determining whether the individual
satisfies any admission, enrollment, eligibility, membership, or other requirement
or condition, which the individual must meet in order to be provided any facilities,
services, or other benefit provided under the program or activity.
(f) Deny an opportunity to participate in a program or activity as an employee.
(3) The Subrecipient may not utilize criteria or methods of administration which have the
effect of subjecting individuals to discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin,
sex, sexual orientation, disability, or familial status or have the effect of defeating or
substantially impairing accomplishment of the objectives of the program or activity with
respect to individuals of a particular race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation,
disability, or familial status.
(4) The Subrecipient, in determining the site or location of housing or facilities provided in
whole or in part with CDBG funds, may not make the selections of such site or location
which have the effect of excluding individuals from, denying them the benefits of, or
subjecting them to discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual
orientation, disability, or familial status or which have the purpose or the effect of
defeating or substantially impairing the accomplishment of the objectives of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 and amendments thereto.
(5) (a) In administering a program or activity funded in whole or in part with CDBG funds
regarding which the Subrecipient has previously discriminated against persons
on the grounds of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability,
or familial status, the Subrecipient must take affirmative actions to overcome the
effects of prior discrimination.
(b) Even in the absence of such prior discrimination the Subrecipient, in
administering a program or activity funded in whole in part with CDBG funds,
should take affirmative action to overcome the effects of conditions which would
otherwise result in limiting participation by persons of a particular race, color,
national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or familial status. Where
previous discriminatory practice or usage tends, on the grounds of race, color,
national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or familial status, to exclude
individuals from participation in, to deny them the benefits or, or to subject them
to discrimination under any program or activity to which CDBG funding applies,
7
B.
othvee rcSoumbree cthipei ecnotn sheaqsu eannc eosb loigf athtieo np ritoor dtaiskcer imreinaasotonrayb plera catcictieo no r tuos aregme, oavned otor accomplish the purpose of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and amendments thereto.
(c) aTchteio nS utbor eacmipeielinotr asthea lal nn oitm bbea lapnrochei biinte ds ebrvyi ctehsis opra rfta cfriolimtie st apkirnogv idaendy etoli gaibnley pgueropgorsaep hoicf saurceha a ocrt iosnp eisc itfoic o gvreorucopm oef ppreiorsro dnissc wrimithinina tiotsry juprriascdtiiccteio onr wushaegree . the
(6) sNhoatwll ibthes ctaonndsitnruge adn tyot hpirnogh itboi tt thhee cSounbtrraercyip iine nSte fcrotimon ms aAin(1ta) -i(n5in), gn oort hcionngs ctrouncttaininge sde phaerraetien blivaisnigs foafc islietiex si so rn roets tp rrooohmibi tfeadci lwitihees nfo irn tshteitu dtiifofenrael not rs ecuxestso. dFiaulr tsheerrvmicoerse , csaenle pctrioopne orlny thbee performed only by a member of the same sex as the recipients of the services.
Employment Discrimination
(1) Temhep loSyumberenct ibpeiecnatu sseh oafll rancoet, cdoislocrr, imnaintiaotnea l aogriagiinns, ts eaxn, ys eexumapl looryieeen taotiro na, pdpisliacbainlitty , foorr efammpillioayl esdta, tuasn.d T thhea tS eumbrpelcoiypeieenst asrhea ltlr teaaktee da,f fdirumraintgiv ee macptliooynm toe ennt, swuriteh othuat t raepgpalricda tnot st haereir aracctieo,n csohlaolrl, inncalutiodnea, bl uotr ingoint ,b es elixm, itseedx tuoa, lt hoer ifeonlltoawtioinng, : deimsapbloiliytym, eonrt , fuapmgirliaadl insgta, tdues.m Soutiochn ootrh terar nfsofremr,s reocf rcuoitmmpeennt soart iroenc raunitdm esnetl eacdtivoenr tfiosirn gtr,a lianyinogf f inocr lutedrimngin aatpiopnre, nratitcee sohf ipp.a yT hoer Sapupblriceacniptise nfot r aegmrepelosy mtoe npt,o nsot tiicne sa sectotinnsgp ifcourtohu sth ep lparcoev isaiovnasil aobfl eth itso n oenmdpislocyriemeisn aationnd clause.
(2) oTnh eb eShuablrf eocfi pthieen St usbhraellc, iipnie anllt , ssotlaicteita tthioant sa lol qr uaadlvifeierdtis aepmpelicnatsn tfso rw eilml rpelcoeyievees c polnasciedde rbayti oonr dfoisr aebmiliptylo, yomr feanmt iwliaitlh sotauttu rse. gards to race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation,
(3) Tit hhea sS uab creoclleipcietivnet sbhaarlgl asiennindg t oa geraecehm laebnot ro ur noitohne ro rc orenptrraecste onrta utinvdee orsf twaonrdkinegrs, aw intho twicheo mto rbeep rpersoevnidtaetdiv eb oy f tthhee SCuitbyr'es ccipoienntrta'sc tcinogm mofiftimceernst sa udnvdiseinr gS etchteio nla 2b0o2r oufn Eioxne court ivweo Orkredresr' pNloa.c e1s1 2a4v6a iloafb Slee tpot eemmbpelor y2e4e,s 1a9n6d5 ,a papnldic ashntasl l fopro setm cpolopyiems eonft .t he notice in conspicuous
(4) T24h,e 1S9u6b5r,e acnipdi eonf tt shhea rlul cleosm, rpelyg uwlaitthio anlls p, raonvdis rioenlesv oanf tE oxredceurtsiv oef Othred eSr e1c1r2e4ta6r yo fo Sf eLpatbeomr. ber
(5) TOhrdee Sr uNbroe. c1ip1ie2n4t6 s hoaf llS feuprnteismh btoe rt h2e4 C, it1y9 a6l5l ,i nafonrdm abtyio tnh ea nrde rlaetpeodr tsru rleeqsu, irreegdu blya tEioxnesc, uatinved orders.
(6) rIne qthueir eedv eton tb eof c tohme pSliuebdr ewcitiphi epnutr'ssu faanilut rteo tthoi sc oAmgrpelye mweitnht ,a tnhye rCulietys ,m raeyg uclaanticoenls, ,t eorrm oirndaeters, ionre sliguisbplee nfodr ifnu rwthheorl eg oovre irnn mpaernt t ictso npterarfcotrsm ina naccec oarndda nthcee wSiuthb rtehcei ppireoncte mduarye sb ea udtheoclraizreedd itnhe E Sxeeccuretitvaer yO orfd eLar bNoor,. o1r1 2a4s6 o tohfe Srwepistee mprboevri d2e4d, b19y 6la5w, o. r by rule, regulation, or order of
(7) TPhaera gSraupbhresc iBp.i(e1n)t thsrhoaulgl hi n(c6lu), daeb othvee, pinr oevviseioryn ss uobfc otnhtera c"tA offrir mpuartcivhea sAe cotirodne r Puonlilceys,s" eSxeecmtiopnte d2 0b4y oruf leEsx, erceugtuivlaet ioOnrsd,e or r Noord. e1r 1o2f4 t6h eo Sf eScerepttaermy boef r L2ab4,o r,1 9is6s5u, edso p uthrsaut asnut ctho provisions will be binding upon each subcontractor or vendor.
Tash eth Seu Cbrietyc impiaeyn td sirheacllt taask ea s muceha ancst ioofn e wniftohr rceinsgp escutc toh apnroyv sisuibocnosn itnracclut doirn pgu srachnactsioen osr dfeorr nino, nocro misp tlhiarnecaete; nperodv widiethd,, lhitoigwaetivoenr , wthitaht ian sthueb ceovnetnrat cthtoer Sourb vreecnidpoier nat sb eac oremseuslt inovf oslvuecdh
8
lditiirgeacttiioonn tboy p trhoete Ccti ttyh, et hinet eSruebsrtse coipf itehnet Umnaitye dre Sqtuaetests .t he United States to enter into such
(8) oTfh eth eS uAbgree cDipiisecnrti mshinaallt ionno t Adcist corfim 1i9n7a5te (o4n2 tUhe.S b.Ca.s i6s1 o0f1 a egte sienq v.i)o olar tiwonit ho fr easnpye pctr otovi saionny Aotchte orfw 1is9e7 3q u(2a9li fUie.dS .dCis. a7b9l4e)d. Tinhdei vSiduubarel caisp ipenrot vsihdaeldl a ilns oS percotvioidne 5 r0e4a doyf athcec eRsesh toa bainlitda tuiosne tohfe a lsl tCanDdBaGrd sfu ensdtsa balsisshisetde din b uthiled iAngrcsh tiote pcthuyrsailc Balalyr rdieisrsa bAlecdt opfe 1rs9o6n8s (i4n2 c Uom.Sp.Clia. n4c1e5 w1 ietht seq.) and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1992.
33. Religious Proselytizing or Political Activities:
34.
iTnh ec oSnunbercetcioipni ewnti tahg rtheee sp tehrafto irtm wailnl cneo to pf etrhfoisr mA ogrr epeemrmenit ta. nFyu rnedlisg iouunsd eprr otsheisly taizginrege omr epnotl itwiciall l baect ivuistieeds epxrocmluostivee alyn fyo rr epleigrifoourms aonr cpeo loitfi cthael ascetrivviitcieess. reFquurtihreedr iunn adcecr othrdisa Ancgere wemithe n2t4 a CndF Rn o5 f7u0n.2d0s 0sUh)a, lle bt es euqs.e, dth teo Subrecipient shall not:
A aEsn gpaagret oinf itnhhee rpernotglyra rmelsig iooru ss earcvticiveitsie fsu, nsduecdh uasn dweor rsthhiisp , praerltig. iIof uasn i nosrtgruacntiizoant,i oonr pcroonsdeulycttisz astiuocnh, asectrivviictieess ,f uthned eadc utivnidtieers thmisu spta brte, aonffde rpeadr tisceippaatriaotne lmy,u isnt btime ev oolur nltoacray tifoonr , thfreo mbe ntheefi cpiarorigersa mofs t hoer HUD-funded programs or services;
B. Uinssetr udcirteiocnt, CoDr pBrGos feulnydtizsa ttoio snu; pport any inherently religious activities, such as worship, religious
C. rDeilsigciroimn ionra tree liaggioauinss bt eali epfrso; gram beneficiary or prospective program beneficiary on the basis of
D. tUhsoes eC sDtrBuGc tufurnedss a froer uthseed a fcoqru iinshiteiorne,n ctloyn rsetlriguicotuiosn a, cotri vrietiheasb, ilitation of structures to the extent that
Faith Based Organizations:
tNoo atwbiidthes btayn Edixnegc uPtaivraeg Orardpehr 3 133 a2b7o9v, ea,s i fp Sroumbruelgcaiptieedn ta its 2 a4 FCaFitRh B5.a1s0e9d, Oetr. gsaenqiz. ation, Subrecipient agrees
35. Alterations, Encumbrances, Mechanics' Liens:
iTmhper oSvuebmreecniptsie, ntth aeg preroeps ethrtayt oit rw ailnl yn opt amrta kthee, roero sf,u fwfeitrh toou bt et hmea dperi,o ar nwy raittlteenr actioonnsse tnot thoef CthDeB CGi tfyu. nTdheed Speurbforermcipeide,n mt sahtearlila lk feuerpn isthhee dp, roorp eobrtlyig afrteioen sfr oinmc uarrneyd ebnyc tuhme bSraunbcreecsi poier nltie. nTsh ea rSisuinbgre coiupti eonft aagnrye ewso trok submit performance, and labor and materials bonds on any improvements over $5,000.00.
36. Notices:
Abell nseontitc etos ,t hmee fmololorwanindga ,a rdedproerstsse, sd.r afts, and communications shall be served in writing. The notices shall
CCiotym munity Development - Housing
City of El Cajon
2E0l 0C aCjoivnic, CCAen 9te2r0 W20a y
9
SEuabstr eCciopuienntyt Transitional AIntctn. : Harold H. Brown, C15h2ie7f EEaxsetc Mutaivine SOtfrfeiceetr El Cajon, CA 92021
Living Center,
37. Amendments: Variations:
38.
39.
oTrhaisl A wgrrietinegm wenitths antotat cchomnteanintes de hmebreoidni,e esx tcheep wt ahso lhee oref itnh ep rAovgirdeeedm, aedndt oitifo tnh eo rp vaarrtiieastio hne oref ttoh.e T theermres aorfe t hnios Aapgpreroevmeedn at nsdh aelxl encout tbeed vbayl itdh eu nCleitsys C moaudnec ili.n the form of a written amendment to the Agreement formally
Savings Clause:
sIfh aanlly, ipnrsoovfiasri oans orfe tahsiso nAagbrleye pmoesnsitb isle ,f ocuonndti ntou eb ein i nfuvall lfido,r cveo iidn, eofrf eucnte wniftohrocueta bbelein, gth iem rpeamiraeidn ionrg i npvroavliidsaiotends in any way.
Exhibit( s ):
hTehree iEnx. hibits to this Agreement are an integral part of this Agreement and have each been incorporated
wINr itWtenIT aNbEoSvSe . WHEREOF, the parties have caused this Agreement to be executed as of the day and year first
cCoITrpYo raOtiFo n,E L CAJON, a charter city and municipal
B y (',G/ rana()􀃭 Mitchet;1r, 􀃮􀀅/ity /M anager
By Harold . Brown Chief Executive Officer
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
ee
10
SCOPE OFE WXHOIBRIKT A"AN"D BUDGET
Project: Emergency Shelter
Contact Person: Harold H. Brown, Chief Executive Officer (61 9-977-0633)
Statement of Work: The Subrecipient agrees to use the Community Development Block Grant funds allocated
by the City for Fiscal Year 2019-2020 to provide the Emergency Shelter Program/Project in the City of El Cajon.
Section 1 - Work Description: (To be completed by Subrecipient-must describe work activi!ies approved by City Council) . /J U,.k).-& t 􀀃 􀀄-􀀅 1.vl-tt,, 􀀆J􀀇t., M?eJS rb 􀀄􀀅, 􀀆
Section 2 - Records and Reporting
The Subrecipient shall submit a Periodic Performance Report, which shall become Exhibit "C" hereto, for the
previous reporting period. Reporting periods must be monthly due to the short timeframe these funds will likely be
spent. Periodic Performance Reports are due by the 10th of the month following the reporting period. These
reports shall include the following information:
A Number of individual clients served (individual client may be a person or a household)
B. Race of clients served
C. Ethnicity of clients served (Hispanic, yes or no - a person may be of any race and be Hispanic)
D. Number of disabled clients served (as defined by the Social Security Administrative Guidelines)
E. Whether or not the head of the household is female
F. Number of clients who are low income (per HUD guidelines)
G. Whether or not the client is an El Cajon resident.
H. Number of new clients assisted. In addition, a brief narrative (Exhibit "C-2") must accompany the report. Narrative should include (but is not
limited to) the following:
A Outreach methods used;
B. Number and disposition of complaints received; and
C. Progress made toward goals as evidenced in Exhibit "A", or an explanation of lack thereof.
D. Any other accomplishments or problems/concerns the Agency wishes to report.
Section 3 - Key Program Goals and Timeline
e City of El Cajon during the period of May 13, 2020 to June 30, 2021.
Section 4 - Budget
individuals with
􀃻
The City agrees to pay Subrecipient a total sum of One Hundred Eighty Five Thousand Two Hundred Ninety
Fou r Dollars and no/1 00s dollars ($1 85,294) to assist in the provision of the above mentioned services. It is
further agreed that no funding shall be disbursed unless the Subrecipient is in full compliance with the provisions
of this Agreement. The City shall make payment of these funds on a reimbursement basis contingent upon a
written request and submittal of receipts or appropriate proof of payment from the Subrecipient. Payments will not
be paid unless and until periodic reports are current. Payments may be made on a monthly or quarterly basis, at
the Subrecipient's option.
EXHIBIT "A-2"
PUBLIC SERVICE PROGRAM BUDGET
PROJECT TITLE I Emergency Shelter
COST COMPONENT CDBG FUNDS OTHER FUNDS1 IN-KIND TOTAL PROJECT
PERSONNEL SERVICES
Salaries (See Schedu le B of
Aoolication) !0 , 00D
Frinqe Benefits
Total Personnel 0 '&;) , IYV} 􀀅 0 0
CONTRACTUAL SERVICES
Professional Services 1 '1 l>O O
Telephone
Utilities 3 rln(J Rent -Z, . lJ O r>
Insurance (reauired) '-(('.) nnn
Maintenance c::; rv, ll
Travel/Mileaqe
Finqerprintinq
Other (soecifv)f'._.,d1.. _ _ StJ;t-. It;;􀀇 • 1.0i'-J
Total Contractual 19'5 􀀊1.1 􀀋 ,􀀇􀀆oo- ---o ·i.. 0 0
COMMODITIES
Program/Office Supplies
Printing
Postage/Office Equ ipment
Other ( specify)
Total Commodities 0 0 0 0
Total Project Budget
cUosme pthoen esnptsa cthe abt ereloqwui rteo celaxrpifliaciant iopnro: fessional services, office equipment expenditures or other cost #J/i>r
Note: CDBG paid expenditures must be documented with receipts and or invoices that verify the expense was
incurred. To minimize the amount of expense documentation, we strongly suggest the CDBG dollars be used to
pay for only a few program costs and not spread out over several line items. If CDBG funds are requested to pay
for Personnel Services (salaries), system-generated reports may be submitted, and copies of timecards,
paychecks, etc. may be retained in Subrecipient's administrative office, and must be made available for review
upon request as set forth in Paragraph 9 of this Agreement.
1 Includes Federal and non- Federal funding sources
FY2019-2020 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT PROGRAM
REQlJEST FOR PAYMENT
""NOTE: To request Electronic Version of this form, send an e-mail to jkasviki@cityofelcajoo.us
EXH I BIT "B"
This Request for Payment is presented to the City of El Cajon to obtain reimbursement for the operation of the Project named below for the Payment Period listed below. The payment
is requested for the portion of the contract budget stated in Column B.
SUBRECIPIENT East County Transitional Living Center Inc
PAYMENT PERIOD
PREPARED BY
FY 2019-20
Job Title
Job Title
Job Title
Salaries & Wages
Payroll Taxes
Fringe Benefits
PERSONNEL
Office Suplies
Postage
Rent and Utilities
Telephone
Other
Other
Other
Other
Other-Shelter Pgrm
NON-PERSONNEL
Ivan Andujar
Contract IExpenditures tol
Bud11:et Date
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0 $0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$185,294 $1 85,294.00
$185,294 $185,294.00
(TOTAL PROGRAM I $185,294 I $185,294.00
Balance
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
Name
JUL
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
AUG
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
SEP
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
PROJECT Emergency Shelter Program CV-19
TOTAL PAYMENT
OCT
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
(6 1 9) 749-6413
Phone
NOV
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
DEC
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
JAN
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
FEB
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
MAR
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
APR
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
MAY
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
JUN
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
I hereby certify the above expenditures were incurred in carrying out the objective of the project contract, are authorized in the approved contract budget, and that contracted services
were performed in accordance with the Agreement.
Date Signature & Title ofSubrecipient Executive
C ITY OF EL CAJON
COMMUl\i, •Y DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT • • ,OG RAM
PERIODIC PERFORMANCE REPORT
FY Period Reported: ___F -'Y'""'2""0""'1:.;:9'--2=-0;a..;2::.a0., _____ _
Agency Name: East County Transitional Living Center Inc
Program Name: Emergency Shelter Program CV-1 9
Quarter/Month Reported:
Reporter's Name: Ivan Andujar
Phone Number: (619) 749-6413
EXH I BIT "C"
Numbers served must reflect number of Persons (P) served. Number of Households (H) served may only be reported with prior
approval of the Redevelopment & Housing Division.
Please indicate (P) or (H) :
1 . TOTAL
White
Black / African American
Asian
American Indian / Alaskan
Native
Native Hawaiian I Other
Pacific Islander
American Indian / Alaskan
Native and White
Asian and White
Black / African American
and White
American Indian / Alaskan
Native & Black / African
American
Other/Multi-Racial
2. TOTAL
Extremely Low Income
0-30% MFI
Low Income
>30-50% MFI
Moderate Income
(>50-80% MFI)
Income above 80% MFI
3. TOTAL
Homeless
Female Headed Households
Disabled/Special Needs
(P)
(A)
Number of Persons
served with El Cajon's
CDBG funding this
Quarter/Month
0
Total # Each Race
0
0
0
Annual City Grant Amount: $185,294
(B) (C)
How many in Column Cumulative number of
(D)
(A) reported as Persons served
Year-To-Date
How many in Column
Hispanic (this
(July 1 to end of
(C) reported as
Quarter/Month for Each Hispanic Year-To-Date?
Race)? current report period)
0 0 0
Total # of Hispanics Total # Each Race Total # of Hispanics
Each Race Year-to-Date Each Race Year-to-Date
0 0 0
0
0
IMPORTANT-PLEASE NOTE: 1 ) Hispanic is no longer considered a race, but an ethnicity and must be reported separately. A
member of any race must also report as Hispanic or Non-Hispanic. "Other" is for multi-racial reports only and must be identified in
the narrative report. 2) Totals for lines 1, 2. and 3 must match each other for each column. 3) List only unduplicated program
participants-clients receiving continued services from previous fiscal year may be counted only once during the new contract year.
4) A narrative report must accompany this form. The narrative should include the definition of "Persons Served" (typically El Cajon
residents) and should reflect all additional data collected as agreed in the contract such as Number of Families served, Number of
Projects Completed, Number of Program Hours provided, Number of Bed Nights provided, or other Performance Outcome
Measurements. For questions, please call the Housing Division at (61 9) 441-1786.
Rev. 06/13/2014 c:\userslivan_a\desktop\cbdg-hud programs\emer. housing fy 2019-20\april 2020 emergency housinglperiodic program report april 2020.doc
CDBG LOY 1OD CLIENTELE NATIONAL OBJECTP REPORT
1 FEDERAL FISCAL YEAR 2019-2020
PROJECT STATUS NARRATIVE
EXHIBIT "C-2"
The purpose of this form is to report accomplishment data for the project named below. This form must be completed for projects providing
eligible CDBG/HOME activities to Low to Moderate Income residents of the City of El Cajon. This form must be completed and submitted
with each monthly/qumterly Periodic Performance Report.
AGENCY NAME:
PROJECT NAME:
REPORTING PERIOD:
PREPARED BY:
PROJECT STATUS:
East County Transitional Living Center Inc
Emergency Shelter Program CV- 1 9
Ivan Andujar
NAME
Pending O Active O
PROJECT STATUS NARRATIVE:
Complete O
(6 1 9) 749-64 1 3
PHONE
Date: -------
S U BJ ECT :
REFEREN C E :
P U RP O S E
C ITY O F EL CAJ O N
C I TY C O U N C I L P OL I CY
I n s u ra nce Req u i rements
Adopted 7 /26/94
Amended 1 1 /29/05
Ame nded 04/1 4/1 5
EXH I B IT D
POLICY
D-3
E F F E CTIVE PAG E
04/1 4/1 5 1 of 8
To provide a u n iform C ity policy fo r liability i ns u ra n ce requ i rements and to esta blish proced ures for
its consis tent a p p l icati o n .
BACKG R O U N D
T o h e l p p rotect the C ity agai nst l i a b i l ity, a l l i n d ivid u a ls , contractors , agen cies a n d organ izations
co nd u cting b u s i ness in association with , on be h a lf of, or in certain circumstances with in the C ity of
El Caj o n are req u i red to mainta i n adequ ate l i a b i l ity i n s u ra n ce coverage acceptable to the C ity.
Because of the d ifferi n g levels of protection needed for vario us activities conducted with in the City,
the City has esta bl i s h ed policy l i mits a n d sta n d a rd s wh ich d irectly relate to the type of activity
being co n d u cted.
POLICY
A l l ind ivi d u a l s , contractors , agencies , a n d org a n izations cond ucting business either for the C ity of
El Cajon (o r the S u ccessor Age n cy to the El C ajon Red evelop ment Agency) o r pursuant to a n
o rd ina nce , resolutio n , a g reement or pol icy req u iring t h e m a i nte n a n ce of l i a b i l ity i n s u rance s h a l l
provid e p roof o f l i a b i l ity i n s u ra n ce i n t h e following amou n ts and writte n o n a n occu rrence basis
(claims made coverage will be accepted o n ly after verifying that occu rrence coverage is not
availa b le) :
1 . A com bi ned s i ng le l imit policy with aggregate l i mits in the amount of $2 m i l l ion for a l l
co nstructi o n p rojects a n d for carn ivals, s u bd ivisions, and pollution coverage subject to
se ctio n 5.c. u n de r the h eading " I NS U RA N C E STAN DARD S , " with a mi:\xi m u m ded uctible
or self-in s u ra n ce retention ("S I R") of $500,000; for p o licies n ot h avi ng a "combined s i n g le
l i mit," m in i m u m l i m its i n amou nts as fo llows :
Comme rcial Gen era l L i a b i l ity (CGL): I ns u ra n ce Services Office Form CG 00 0 1 cove ring
CGL on a n "occu rren ce" basis, i n c l u d i n g prod ucts and completed operations, property
damage, bod i ly i nj u ry and person a l & adve rtising i nj u ry with l i mits no less t h a n $ 1 ,000 ,000
per occu rre nce . I f a general aggreg ate l im it applies, either the gene ral aggregate limit s h a l l
apply separately t o t h is project/location o r t h e general aggregate l i m it s h a l l be twice the
req u i red occu rre n ce l i m it.
U n less staff dete rm ines that circumstan ces (i.e. h ig h risk project, etc.) req u i re the h ig her
l i m it, t h e $2,000,000 l i m it s h a l l be decreased to $ 1 , 000,000 with a maxim u m deductible o r
S I R of $ 1 50,000, whe n :
S U BJ ECT :
REFEREN C E :
C I TY O F E L CAJ O N
C I TY COU N C I L P OL I CY
I n su ra n ce Req u i rements
Ado pted 7 /26/94
Ame n ded 1 1 /29/05
Amended 04/1 4/1 5
EXH I B IT D
POLICY
D-3
E F F E CTIVE PAG E
04/1 4/1 5 2 of 8
a. The p u b l ic improvemen ts portion of a s u b d ivision project is less than $50,000; or
b. A co nstru ction p roject ( i n accord a n ce with the Standard Specifications for Public
Works Construction-a n d the Standard Special P rovisions, the "Green Book") is for
less tha n $50, 000.
2 . Except as otherwise p rovided i n this policy, a com b i n ed s in g le l imit p o licy with aggregate
limits in the a m o u nt of $2 m i l l io n for a l l others , i n c l u d i n g , b ut n ot l i mited to, ath letic leagues,
recreati o n g ro u p s , towin g compan ies and p u b l ic service agencies ; for policies not having a
"com b i n ed s i n g le l im it, " m i n i m u m limits i n a m o u n ts as fo l lows:
Commercial Genera l L i a b il ity (CGL) : I ns u ra n ce Services Office Form CG 00 01 covering
CGL o n an "occu rren ce" basis, including p rod u cts and com p leted operati o n s , p roperty
damag e , b o d i l y i nj u ry a n d person a l & advertising i nj u ry with l i mits n o less than $ 1 , 00 0 , 000
per occu rre n ce . I f a g e neral aggregate l im it a p p l ies, e ither the general aggregate limit shall
apply separately to this p roject/location or the genera l aggregate l i m it s h a l l be twice the
req u i red occu rre n ce l i m it.
3. A com b i ned single l i m it policy with aggregate l i m its in the amo u n t of $250,000 for
homeowners i n s u ra n ce or $500 , 000 for commercial general l i a b i l ity i n s u rance fo r small
business own e rs , i n either event o n ly where the i n s u ra nce is requ ired for work i n the p ublic
rig ht-of-way. "Sm a l l b u s iness owners" are defin ed as commercia l b us inesses , or a
professiona l o r a d m i n i strative office uses, where the owners of the b us i ness work o n -site
as their primary cal l i n g o r vocatio n , and h aving n o more th an two (2) employees n ot related
by blood or marriage.
4. S elected h ig h-risk activities that wou ld otherwise fal l under the criteria for category 2 s h a l l
be eval u ated by staff o n a case-by-case basis t o d etermine whether o r n ot the above l i m its
are s ufficient. The i m position of liability l i mits exceed ing $2 m i l l io n for such high -risk
activities is appealable to the C ity C o u n c i l .
5 . $ 1 ,000, 000 for taxicab compan ies .
6. $ 500 ,000 o r actual val u e , whichever i s g reater, for "valuable papers" a n d " i n tra n sit"
i n s u ra n ce where C ity records or person a l p roperty is being transported or stored outside of
C i ty p ro perty.
EXHIBIT D
S U BJECT :
REFERENC E :
C I TY O F E L CAJ O N
C I TY C O U N C I L P O L I C Y
I nsura n ce Req u irements
Adopted 7 /26/94
Amen d ed 1 1 /29/05
Amended 04/1 4/1 5
POLICY
D-3
E F F E CTIVE PAG E
04/1 4/1 5 3 of 8
7 . Exceptions to the above l i mits may b e made for n on-profit, charitable, politica l , com m u n ity
a n d reli g ious organ ization s .
8 . The p o licy or policies of i n s u ra n ce may b e for a l l operations or activities of t h e party
p u rchasing the p o licy o r p o l icies p rovide d , h owever, that the C ity or the S u ccessor Agency
may req u i re a separate p o licy exclusively for o perations of the p u rchaser where the C ity
M a nager, i n h is o r her s o le d iscretio n , d etermines that a s i ng le policy would be i n adequate
to protect the City or S u ccessor Agency i n the even t of m u ltiple catastrophes.
9 . Workers' compensation i n s u ra nce s h a l l meet the m i n imum l i m its req u i red b y law.
INSURANCE STANDARDS
1 . ADM ITTED CARR I E R / B EST'S RAT I NG A, C LASS V I I
a . I ns u rers m ust b e "ad m itted" carriers p u rs u a n t to t h e p rovisions of t h e C a lifo rn ia
I nsurance Code a n d i n accordance with a l l req u i rements of the State I ns u ra n ce
Commission a n d m ust be l isted i n the:
" O F F I C IAL P U B L I CATI O N
D EPARTM ENT O F I NS U RANCE
STATE O F CAL I FO R N IA
45 F remont Street
S a n Fra ncisco, California 941 05
I N S U RA N C E O R GA N IZAT I O N S AUTHO R IZED BY THE I NS U RANCE
COM M I S S I O N T O TRANSACT B U S I N ESS O F I NS U RAN CE
IN THE STATE O F CAL I FO R N IA D U R I NG
[the most recent yea r for wh ich
the p u b lication i s available]."
or
"Californ ia Department of I ns u ra n ce Company Profile."
S U BJ ECT :
C I TY O F E L C AJ O N
C I TY C O U N C I L POL I CY
I ns u ra n ce Req u irements
EXHIBIT D
POLICY
D-3
REFERENC E : Adopted 7 /26/94 E F F EC TIVE PAG E
Amen d e d 1 1 /29/05
Amen d ed 04/1 4/1 5 04/1 4/1 5 4 of 8
b . I ns u rers m ust h ave a Best's rati n g o f A , C lass V I I o r h igher (th is rating i ncludes
th ose i n s u rers with a m i n i m u m p o licyholder's s urpl us of $50 to $ 1 00 m i l l ion).
Exce ptions to the Best's rat i n g m ay be considered when a n insura n ce carrier meets
a l l other standards a n d can satisfy s urplus amounts equ iva len t to an A, Class VI I
rating . An exception to the rat i n g req u i rement may be made for the Californ ia State
C ompensation I ns u ra n ce F u n d if n ot rate d .
2 . NON-A D M I TT E D CAR R I E R / B EST' S RAT I N G A , Class XI I
Exce ptio n s to the "ad mitted " requ i re ment may be con s i dered when a non-adm itted
i n s u ra n ce carrier meets a l l other sta n d a rds herein a n d :
a. is either ( i ) l isted i n :
C a l ifornia Department of I ns u rance
L ist of Approved S u rp l us Line I nsurers
L I S T I N G OF F I L I N GS
or (ii) i s cu rrently a party to co-operation agreements with foreign i n s u ra nce
reg u l ato ry a uthorities acceptable to the C ity M anager or C ity Attorney (for examp le,
for i n s u rers located in the U n ited Kingd o m , agreements m u st be with both the
P rudential Reg u latory Authority ("PRA") a n d the Financial Conduct Authority ("FCA"),
or s u ch successor auth ority o r a u thorities of P RA a nd FCA;
b . e ither t h e carrier or its parent company h a s a Best's rating of A , Class VI I (th is ratin g
i n cl u de those i n s u rers with a m i n i m u m p o licyholder's surplus of $ 5 0 t o $ 1 00 m i l l i o n ;
c. h as ten years or more experience in the business of insura nce ; a n d
d . if applicable, the rei n s u ra nce ca rrier h a s a q ua lified ratin g .
3 . G E N E RAL - I NS U RA N C E C E RTI F I CATE S / ADDITIONAL I N S U R E D
A l l i n s u rers (including those insuring against pollution or d ischarges o f h azardous
materials) m u st p rovide certificates of i ns u ra n ce and end orsements evidencing cove rage
prior to the start of any co ntract. A l l certificates or endorsements m ust include:
S U BJ ECT :
C I TY OF E L CAJ O N
C I TY COUNC I L P O L I CY
I ns u ra n ce Req u i rements
EXH I B IT D
PO L I C Y
D-3
REFERENC E : Adopted 7 /26/94 E F F E CTIVE PAG E
Amen d e d 1 1 /29/05
Amended 04/1 4/1 5
• Name of i n s u ra n ce company iss u i ng each p o licy.
04/1 4/1 5 5 of 8
All i n s u rers m ust p rovide a n ori g i n a l e n d o rseme nt n a m i n g the C ity of E l Caj o n
(and/or t h e S u ccessor Agency t o the E l Caj o n Redeve lopment Age n cy) , a n d its
(their) e lected a n d appointed officials, officers, employees a n d volu nteers (fo r
p urposes of t h i s P o licy, i n d ivid ually a n d c o l lecti vely, t h e " C ity I n s u red s") a s
a d d itio n a l i n s u re d s . T h is i n c l u s i o n a s add itional insureds s h a l l not b e requ ired o f
Workers' Compensation or professi o n a l l iabi l ity policies of i n s u ra nce , a n d may be
waived for "va l u a b l e papers" coverage with the approval of the C ity Attorney.
• All i n s u rers m u st p rovide an orig i n a l e n d o rsement stating that the i n s u ra n ce
coverage s h a l l be primary i n s u ra nce as respects the C ity of E l Caj o n (and/or the
Successor Age n cy to the E l Cajon Redevelopment Agency) , and its (their) e lected
a nd appoin ted official s , officers, employees a nd vol u nteers (for pu rposes of this
Policy, i n d ivid u a l ly a n d collectively, the "City Insureds . Any i n s u ra n ce o r selfi
n s u ra n ce m a i ntained by the E ntity, its officers , officials, employees, or volu n teers
s h a l l be excess of the Contractor's i n s u ra n ce and shall not contribute with it.
• Waiver of S u b rogatio n e n dorsement is req uired on Workers' Compensation
Coverage.
• Address of n amed i n s u re d .
• Description of coverage , including a ny special coverage req u i red by the contract .
• Policy n u mbers.
• Policy periods ( I f claims made basis, m ust i n clude retroactive date a n d length of
time allowed as exten ded reporting period) .
• Coverage type (occu rre n ce form vs . claims m ade) .
• Authorized sign atu re a n d d ate of iss u a n ce. An o rig i n a l sig n ature is requ ired : a
d igital s ig n at u re is acceptable so l o n g as it complies with the req u i rements of
Govern ment Code § 1 6 . 5 .
• U n less approved by the C ity Manager o r designee, n o certificate s h a l l be accepted
that q u a l ifies the o b l igation of the carrier to provide 30 d ays written notice of
cancel lation of the p o li cy. With the approval of the C ity Attorney the o b l igation to
p rovide n otice of ca n cellation may be red u ced to ten ( 1 0) d ays , but o n ly for
termination d ue to the n on -paymen t of any p remiu m .
SU BJECT :
REFERENC E :
C ITY O F E L CAJ O N
C I TY C O U N C I L PO L I CY
I ns u ra n ce Requ i rements
Adopted 7 /26/94
Amended 1 1 /29/05
Amended 04/1 4/1 5
EXH I B IT D
POLICY
D-3
E F F E CTIVE PAG E
04/1 4/1 5 6 of 8
4 . P U B L IC WORKS PROJ ECTS
I n a d d ition to the standards set forth a bove , i n s u ra nce policies for p u b l ic works projects
m ust also meet the following i n s u ra n ce req u i reme nts set o u t in the m ost recen t edition of
the G reen Book adopted by the C ity C o u n ci l :
a. A l l i n s u ra n ce certificates shall bear a n endorsement or shall h ave attached a ride r
whereby i t i s p rovided that, i n t h e eve n t of expiration or proposed cancellation o f
s u ch p o licy for a n y reason whatsoever, t h e C ity s h a l l be n otified b y certified m a i l ,
retu rn receipt requ ested , g iving a sufficient time b efore the date thereof to comply
with any applicable law o r statute , but in n o event less than th i rty (30) d ays before
exp i ration or cancellation is effective, the p rovisions of section 3 here i n
n otwithsta n d i n g ; a n d
b . C o m p l iance with L a b o r C o d e §§3700 a n d 3800 rel atin g to Workers' Compensation .
c. Req u i rements of the G reen Book s h a l l p revai l .
5 . P U B L IC R I G H T-OF-WAY
A n app lican t for perm it(s) to d o work wit h i n the pu b l ic right-of-way may estab lish
satisfactory p roof of liability i n s u ra nce in the fol lowing m a n n er:
a . C O N T RACTORS
C o n tractors must fu rnish the C ity with a certificate of l i abil ity i n s u ra nce, which meets
the req u i rements set forth a bove a n d a ny other City req u iremen ts contained i n this
p o l i cy.
b . HOM EOWN E RS / P R O P E RTY OWN E R S
H omeowners/Property owners req uestin g a permit t o do work with i n City rights -ofway
o r easements i mmed i ately adjace n t to their respective owned or occup ied
p roperty, solely for the owner's pers o n a l benefit, shall be req u i red to fu rn ish the C ity
with a copy of their h omeowner's/property owner's liability i n s u ra n ce policy, which
meets the req u irements set forth a bove , with the m i n im u m l i mits described i n
category 3 u nder the head i n g " PO LICY," above. The policy m u st b e effective d u ri n g
the entire period o f the p roposed work, plus two ( 2 ) calen d a r years , and m ust
p rovide coverage for claims arising from the work performe d , or improvements
own e d , by the h omeowner i n the rig ht-of-way or easement. If the encroach ment is
S U BJECT :
REFERENC E :
C I TY OF E L CAJ O N
C I TY C O U N C I L P OLICY
I n su ra n ce Req u i rements
Adopted 7 /26/94
Amen ded 1 1 /29/05
Ame nded 04/1 4/1 5
EXH I B IT D
POLICY
D-3
E F F E CTIVE PAG E
04/1 4/1 5 7 of 8
o n g o i n g , a n n u a l p roof of i n s u rance s h a l l be req u ired . The req u i rement to name the
C ity as an add ition a l i n s u red , and the req u i rement for a policy for two (2) addition a l
calen d a r years , may each b e waived b y the C ity C o u n ci l o r the C ity Manager (or her
designee) i n cases of extreme h a rdsh i p , in their d iscretion .
c. P O L L UT I O N EXC L U S I O N
Appl ications for t h e i n stal lati o n o f mon ito ri n g wel ls for the evaluati o n o f gro u ndwater
pollution or for the d ischarge of formerly p o l luted g ro u n dwater i nto the C ity sewer
system m ust be acco m pa n ied by a certificate of l i a b i lity i n s u ra nce provided by the
p roperty owner. S u ch l iability insurance may not conta i n a pollution exclusion clause
and must exp licitly i n d e m nify the C ity a g a i n st all hazards wh ich may resu lt from
either of these activities, includ i n g a worsen ing of pollut io n , e ither with i n the
s u bsurface adj acent to the origi n a l polluti o n or with i n the City sewer system .
I f the property owner i s u n able t o provide i n s u rance wh ich add resses both g e neral
l i a b i l ity and pollution l i a b i l ity, the enviro n me ntal com pany or oth e r appropri ately
q u al ified entity contracting with the property owner for either mon itoring wel l
i n stal lation or g ro u n dwater pollution remediation , may fu rnish polluti o n l i a b il ity
i n su ra n ce o n b e h a lf of the p roperty owner.
Any i ns u ra n ce approved u nder t h is su bsectio n c. s h a l l be an occurrence policy, a n d
s h a l l otherwise comply with t h e provisions of t h is P o licy.
d. P U B L I C UTI L I T I ES
This policy as it rel ates to work i n the p u blic rig hts-of-way shall n ot be applica b le to
Cable TV, Helix Water D i strict, Padre D a m Mun icipal Water District, S B C , S a n
D iego G a s & E lectric, o r any other p u bl i c utility.
e. TRANS P O RTAT I O N / OVERSIZE LOADS - P E R MITS - See Ch apter 1 0 .24 of the
E l Cajon M u nicipal Code.
S U BJECT :
REFEREN C E :
C I TY O F E L CAJ O N
C I TY COUNCI L P O L I CY
I ns u ra n ce Req u i rements
Adopted 7 /26/94
Amended 1 1 /29/05
Amen d ed 04/1 4/1 5
T I M E LIM ITS / CANCELLATIO N P ROVISIONS
EXH I B IT D
POLICY
D-3
E F F E CTIVE PAG E
04/1 4/1 5 8 of 8
A l l l ia b i lity i n s u ra n ce req u i red p u rsu a n t to t h is poli cy s h a l l p rovide coverage for a sufficient time
period to protect the C ity from l i a b i l ity. The i n s u rer i s req u i red to provide a m i n i m u m of thirty (30)
d ays-n otice of can ce llation of any p o licy. With the approval of the C ity Attorney (except as
p rovided in section 4, herein) t h is o bl igation may be red u ced to n ot less than ten (1 0) days written
n otice, b u t o n ly for termination d u e to the n o n -payment of a n y pre m i u m . I n n o event shall a policy
be accepted wh ich termi nates prior to the com pletion of the activity to be covered .
I n certain circu mstances , it may be i m p racticable to obtai n conti n uing i n s u ra n ce coverage d ue to
t h e du ration of the activity o r the cost of prematu re re newal. U n der s u ch circu mstances , a n
exception to t h e coverage period may b e made so long a s the policy i s renewed o r rep laced with
a n acceptab le i n su ra n ce carrier a n d there is no lapse i n coverag e . M a in tenance of p roper
i n s ura n ce coverage i s a material term of any contract with the City a n d fa i l u re to maintain or
renew coverage or to p rovide evidence of ren ewal may be treated as a material breach of
co ntract.
ALTERNATIVE RISK MANAGEMENT P RACTICES: S ELF-I N S U RANC E ; RISK-POOLING
Alterna tive risk ma nagement p ractices, s u ch as self-in s u ra n ce, risk poo l i n g , risk retention g ro ups,
and oth e r such programs, will be accepted in l ieu of commercial i n s u ra n ce p o licies provided that
the coverage meets the requ i rements o f this P o licy. Any such a lternative risk management
p ractices must meet the fin a n ci a l stre ngth a n d s u rplus req uirements reflected by the Best's
Rati n g s req u ired of commercial i n s u ra n ce u nder t h is Policy.
DECLARATION EOXFH EIBCIOT N"EO"M IC INTERESTS
In submitting its proposal, SUBRECIPIENT represents that SUBRECIPI ENT's responses to the following
questions are true and correct:
1. The proposed public project may affect the market value of real property in the vicinity of the project site.
a. Does the SUBRECIPIENT or anyone in the SUBRECIPIENT's organization Yes have a financial interest in real property located within 2500 feet of the project □ le
site?
b. Has the SUBRECIPI ENT or anyone in the SU BRECIPIENT's organization,
rendered professional services concerning real property located within 2500
feet of the project site? □ 􀀂
C. Has the SUBRECI PIENT or anyone in the SUBRECIPIENT's organization
received income from real property that is located within 2500 feet of the
project site? □ ;f5(
2. The proposed project may affect businesses in the vicinity of the project site.
a. Does the SU BRECIPIENT or anyone in the SUBRECIPIENT's organization
have a financial interest in a business located within 2500 feet of the project
site? □ )B::'
b. Has the SUBRECIPI ENT or anyone in the SUBRECIPIENT's organization
rendered professional services concerning a business that is located within
2500 feet of the project site? □ ¥
C. Has the SUBRECIPIENT or anyone in the SUBRECIPIENT's organization
received income from a business that is located within 2500 feet of the project
site? □ 􀀃
3. Does anyone in SUBRECIPIENT's organization have a spouse or other family member who has a financial interest in any such real property or business? □ ✓
"
SUBRECIPI ENT'S SIGNATURE
East Cou nty Transitional Living Center, Inc.
This document is signed by an · dividual clearly authorized to bind SUBRECIPIENT.
Date: 5 - 1 5 - 􀀈60
EXHIBIT "F"
0MABU DCIITRSC UOLFA SRT AAT-1E3S3, CLEORCTAILF ICGAOTVEE RONFM CEONMTPSL AIANNDC E NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS
CFDA No. for this Grant/Agreement: 14.218 (Community Development Block Grant)
sNpoenc-iFfiecd eraaul deitn titcieosn tdhuactt eedx pefnodr $7th5a0t,0 00ye oarr moinre ina cac oyerdaarn icne F edweitrha l atwhaer dsp srohvailsl ihoansv e ao fs ing0leM Bor prCoigrcraumlarA-
133. Please complete the following by placing an "X" in the appropriate box.
□ expended $750,000 or more in
Federal funds during the prior fiscal year (FY 2018-19)/calendar year (2018).
did not expend $750,000 or more in
Federal funds during the prior fiscal year (FY 2018-19)/calendar year (2018).
wI HithE RthEeB pYr oCvEisRioTnIsF Yo fI 0haMvBe tChierc auulatrh oAr-it1y3 t3o asnigdn afonry thoeth earb oavpep lnicaambleed Faegdeenrcayl aanndd tShtaatt eth lea wags eanncdy rweilgl ucloamtiopnlsy hereinafter enacted.
By:
Print Name
Title:
Date:
EXH IBIT "G"
WORKER'S COMPENSATION INSURANCE CERTIFICATE
The Subrecipient shall execute the following form as required by the California Labor Code,
Sections 1860 and 1861.
I am aware of the provision of Section 3700 of the Labor Code which requires every employer to
be insured against liability for worker's compensation or to undertake self-insurance in accordance
with the provisions of that code, and I will comply with such provisions before commencing the
performance of the work of this contract.