AMENDMENT NO. 1 TO EXTEND AND AMENDAGREEMENT FOR CITYWIDE ABANDON ITEMS/LITTER REMOVAL SERVICES URBAN CORPS OF SAN DIEGO 
This Amendment No. 1 is entered into and effective as of the _______ day of ___________________________, 2019, extending and amending the agreement dated September 17, 2018 (the “Agreement”) by and between the City of Carlsbad, a municipal corporation, ("City"), and Urban Corps of San Diego, a not-for-profit corporation, (“Contractor") (collectively, the “Parties”) for collecting abandoned items and litter removal services. 

RECITALS 
A. The Parties desire to alter the Agreement’s scope of work to modify the total compensation of theAgreement; and 
B. TheParties desire to extend theAgreement for aperiod of one (1)year;and 
C. The Parties have negotiated and agreed to a supplemental scope of work and fee schedule, which is attached to and incorporated in by this reference as Exhibit “A”, Scope of Services and Fee. 
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of these recitals and the mutual covenants contained herein, City and Contractor agree as follows: 
1. 
In addition to those services contained in the Agreement, as may have been amended from time to time, Contractor will provide those services described in Exhibit "A". With this Amendment, the total annual Agreement amount shall not exceed ninety-nine thousand dollars ($99,000). 

2. 
City will pay Contractor for all work associated with those services described in Exhibit “A” on a time and materials basis not-to-exceed ninety-nine thousand dollars ($99,000). Contractor will provide City, on a monthly basis, copies of invoices sufficiently detailed to include hours performed, hourly rates, and related activities and costs for approval by City. 


3. Contractor will complete all work described in Exhibit “A” by September 15, 2020. 
4. 
All other provisions of the Agreement, as may have been amended from time to time, will remain in full force and effect. 

5. 
All requisite insurance policies to be maintained by the Contractor pursuant to the Agreement, as may have been amended from time to time, will include coverage for this Amendment. 


/// 
/// 
City Attorney Approved Version 1/30/13 
1 
6. The individuals executing thisAmendment and the instruments referenced in it on behalf of Contractor each represent and warrant that they have the legal power, right and actual authority to bind Contractor to the terms and conditions of thisAmendment. 
CONTRACTOR, URBAN CORPS OF CITY OF CARLSBAD, a municipal SAN DIEGO, a not-for-profit corporation corporation of the State of California 
By: By: 
(sign here) for Scott Chadwick, City Manager 
Kyle Kennedy / CEO (print name/title) 
ATTEST: 

By: 
(sign here) for Barbara Engleson, City Clerk 
(print name/title) 

If required by City, proper notarial acknowledgment of execution by Contractor must be attached. If a corporation, Agreement must be signed by one corporate officer from each of the following two groups: 
Group A Group B Chairman, Secretary, President, or Assistant Secretary, Vice-President CFO or Assistant Treasurer 
Otherwise, the corporation must attach a resolution certified by the secretary or assistant secretary under corporate seal empowering the officer(s) signing to bind the corporation. 
APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
CELIA A. BREWER, City Attorney 
BY: _____________________________ Deputy City Attorney 
City Attorney Approved Version 1/30/13 
2 
EXHIBIT “A” 
SCOPE OF SERVICES UPDATE 
CITYWIDE ABANDON ITEMS AND LITTER REMOVAL SERVICES 
This Amendment adjusts the scope of services for the Citywide Abandon Items and Litter Removal Services Agreement provided by Urban Corps. 
With this Amendment, the Corps Member hourly wage is increased from $17.25 per hour to $22.50 per hour. Correspondingly, the total staff hours dedicated to the Agreement are adjusted lower, from two (2) Corps Members to one (1) Corps Member. Additionally, this Amendment adds four hundred and fifty (450) “Large Event/Additional Corps Member Labor” hours to the Agreement, whereas these hours utilized in addition to regularly scheduled Corps Member Labor for large scale abandon item or litter removal services. Lastly, this Amendment clarifies the Vehicle Fuel charge, changing the frequency from ten (10) $96 charges to $80 per month. 
Future wage increases associated with this Agreement shall be determined by the San Diego Consumer Price Index, but not to exceed 2.5% per year and per approval of the Agreement administrator. Wage increases must be requested at least 60 days in advance and in writing to 
the city’s designated Agreement administrator. 
Description  Quantity (EA)  Maximum Hours  Rate/Hour  Annual Cost  
Supervisor  1.0  1664  $30.00  $49,920  
Corps Member Labor  1.0  1664  $22.50  $37,440  
Large Event/Additional Corp Member Labor  1.0  450  $22.50  $10,680  
Vehicle Fuel  $80/month  $960.00  
Total (amount not to exceed per agreement year)  $99,000  

City Attorney Approved Version 1/30/13 
3 
URBAN-7 OP ID: KV 
DATE (MM/DD/YYYY) CERTIFICATE OF LIABILITY INSURANCE 12/11/2018  
THIS CERTIFICATE IS ISSUED AS A MATTER OF INFORMATION ONLY AND CONFERS NO RIGHTS UPON THE CERTIFICATE HOLDER. THIS CERTIFICATE DOES NOT AFFIRMATIVELY OR NEGATIVELY AMEND, EXTEND OR ALTER THE COVERAGE AFFORDED BY THE POLICIES BELOW. THIS CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE DOES NOT CONSTITUTE A CONTRACT BETWEEN THE ISSUING INSURER(S), AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OR PRODUCER, AND THE CERTIFICATE HOLDER.  
IMPORTANT: If the certificate holder is an ADDITIONAL INSURED, the policy(ies) must be endorsed. If SUBROGATION IS WAIVED, subject to the terms and conditions of the policy, certain policies may require an endorsement. A statement on this certificate does not confer rights to the certificate holder in lieu of such endorsement(s).  
PRODUCER Faith Insurance Services Brakke Schafnitz Ins. Brokers 28202 Cabot Rd. Suite 600 Laguna Niguel, CA 92677 Charles A. Faith  CONTACT NAME: Keri Vogt  
PHONE (A/C, No, Ext):949-365-5144  FAX (A/C, No): 949-313-3288  
E-MAIL ADDRESS: keri.vogt@sig.us  
INSURER(S) AFFORDING COVERAGE  NAIC #  
INSURER A : American States Insurance  19704  
INSURED Urban Corps of San Diego CountyPO Box 80156 San Diego, CA 92138  INSURER B : General Ins. Co. of America  
INSURER C :  
INSURER D :  
INSURER E :  
INSURER F :  

COVERAGES CERTIFICATE NUMBER: REVISION NUMBER: 

CERTIFICATE HOLDER CANCELLATION 


•••• REPRINTED FROM THE ARCHIVE. THE ORIGINAL TRANSACTION MAY INCLUDE ADDITIONAL FORMS .... 
(b) This insurance does not apply to "bodily injury" or "property dam­age" arising out of the sole negli­gence of such person or organization; 
(4) Permits issued by any state or political subdivision with respect to operations performed by you or on your behalf, subject to the following additional pro­vision: 
This insurance does not apply to "bodily injury", "property damage", or "personal and advertising injury" arising out of operations performed for the state or municipality. 
c. The insurance with respect to any architect, engineer, or surveyor added as an insured by this endorsement does not apply to 
"bodily injury", "property damage", or "per­sonal and advertising injury" arising out of the rendering of or the failure to render any professional services by or for you, includ­ing: 
(1) 
The preparing, approving, or failing to prepare or approve maps, drawings, opinions, reports, surveys, change or­ders, designs or specifications; and 

(2) 
Supervisory, inspection or engineering services. 

d. 
This insurance does not apply to "bodily injury" or "property damage" included within the "products-completed operations haz­ard". 


A person's or organization's status as an insured un­der this endorsement ends when your operations for that insured are completed. 
No coverage will be provided if, in the absence of this endorsement, no liability would be imposed by law on you. Coverage shall be limited to the extent of your negligence or fault according to the applicable princi­ples of comparative fault. 
NON-OWNED WATERCRAFT AND NON-OWNED AIRCRAFT LIABILITY 
Exclusion g. of COVERAGE A (Section I) is replaced by the following: 
g. "Bodily injury" or "property damage" arising out of the ownership, maintenance, use or entrustment to others of any aircraft, "auto" or watercraft owned or operated by or rented or loaned to any insured. Use includes oper­ation and "loading or unloading". 
This exclusion applies even if the claims against any insured allege negligence or other wrongdoing in the supervision, hiring, employment, training or monitoring of others by that insured, if the "occurrence" which caused the "bodily injury" or "property damage" involved the ownership, mainte­nance, use or entrustment to others of any aircraft, "auto" or watercraft that is owned or operated by or rented or loaned to any in­sured. 
This exclusion does not apply to: 
(1) 
A watercraft while ashore on premises you own or rent; 

(2) 
A watercraft you do not own that is: 

(a) 
Less than 52 feet long; and 

(b) 
Not being used to carry persons or property for a charge; 



(3) 
Parking an "auto" on, or on the ways next to, premises you own or rent, pro­vided the "auto" is not owned by or rented or loaned to you or the insured; 

(4) 
Liability assumed under any "insured contract" for the ownership, mainte­nance or use of aircraft or watercraft; or 

(5) 
"Bodily injury" or "property damage" arising out of: 

(a) 
the operation of machinery or equipment that is attached to, or part of, a land vehicle that would qualify under the definition of "mobile equipment" if it were not subject to a compulsory or financial responsibility law or other motor ve­hicle insurance law in the state where it is licensed or principally garaged; or 

(b) 
the operation of any of the machin­ery or equipment listed in Paragraph f.(2) or f.(3) of the definition of "mobile equipment". 



(6) 
An aircraft you do not own provided it is not operated by any insured. 



TENANTS' PROPERTY DAMAGE LIABILITY 
When a Damage To Premises Rented To You Limit is 
shown in the Declarations, Exclusion j. of Coverage 
A, Section I is replaced by the following: 
j. Damage To Property 
"Property damage" to: 
(1) Property you own, rent, or occupy, including any costs or expenses incurred by you, or 

Page 2 of 4 
AFP-META2-23-PRINT00 1 ·0282-0038-V 
•••• REPRINTED FROM THE ARCHIVE. THE ORIGINAL TRANSACTION MAY INCLUDE ADDITIONAL FORMS .... 
any other person, organization or entity, for repair, replacement, enhancement, restora­tion or maintenance of such property for any reason, including prevention of injury to a person or damage to another's property; 
(2) 
Premises you sell, give away or abandon, if the "property damage" arises out of any part of those premises; 

(3) 
Property loaned to you; 


(4) 
Personal property in the care, custody or control of the insured; 

(5) 
That particular part of real property on which you or any contractors or subcontractors working directly or indirectly on your behalf are performing operations, if the "property damage" arises out of those operations, or 

(6) 
That particular part of any property that must be restored, repaired or replaced because "your work" was incorrectly performed on it. 


Paragraphs (1), (3) and (4) of this exclusion do not apply to "property damage" (other than damage by fire) to premises, including the con­tents of such premises, rented to you. A separate limit of insurance applies to Damage To Prem­ises Rented To You as described in Section Ill -Limits Of Insurance. 
Paragraph (2) of this exclusion does not apply if the premises are "your work" and were never occupied, rented or held for rental by you. 
Paragraphs (3), (4), (5) and (6) of this exclusion do not apply to liability assumed under a side­track agreement. 
Paragraph (6) of this exclusion does not apply to "property damage" included in the "products­completed operations hazard". 
Paragraph 6. of LIMITS OF INSURANCE (Section Ill) is replaced by the following: 
6. Subject to 5. above, the Damage To Premises Rented To You Limit is the most we will pay un­der Coverage A for damages because of "property damage" to any one premises, while rented to you, or in the case of damage by fire, while rented to you or temporarily occupied by you with permission of the owner. 
The Damage To Premises Rented To You limit is the higher of the Each Occurrence Limit shown in the Declarations or the amount shown in the Declarations as Damage To Premises Rented To You Limit. 
WHO IS AN INSURED -MANAGERS 
The following is added to Paragraph 2.a. of WHO IS AN INSURED (Section II): 
Paragraph (1) does not apply to executive officers, or to managers at the supervisory level or above. 
SUPPLEMENTARY PAYMENTS -COVERAGES A AND B -BAIL BONDS -TIME OFF FROM WORK 
Paragraph 1.b. of SUPPLEMENTARY PAYMENTS ­COVERAGES A AND B is replaced by the following: 
b. Up to $3,000 for cost of bail bonds required because of accidents or traffic law violations arising out of the use of any vehicle to which the Bodily Injury Liability Coverage applies. We do not have to furnish these bonds. 

Paragraph 1.d. of SUPPLEMENTARY PAYMENTS COVERAGES A AND B is replaced by the following: 
d. All reasonable expenses incurred by the in­sured at our request to assist us in the in­vestigation or defense of the claim or ''suit", including actual loss of earnings up to $500 a day because of time off from work. 

EMPLOYEES AS INSUREDS -HEAL TH CARE SERVICES 
Provision 2.a.(1)(d) of WHO IS AN INSURED (Section 
II) is deleted, unless excluded by separate endorse­ment. 
EXTENDED COVERAGE FOR NEWLY ACQUIRED ORGANIZATIONS 
Provision 3.a. of WHO IS AN INSURED (Section 11) is replaced by the following: 
a. Coverage under this provision is afforded only until the end of the policy period. 

EXTENDED "PROPERTY DAMAGE" 
Exclusion a. of COVERAGE A (Section I) is replaced by the following: 
a. "Bodily injury" or "property damage" expected or intended from the standpoint of the insured. This exclusion does not apply to "bodily injury" or "property damage" resulting from the use of reasonable force to protect persons or property. 
CG 76 35 02 07 Page 3 of 4 EP 
AFP-META2-23-PRINT00 1 -0282-0039-V 
•••• REPRINTED FROM THE ARCHIVE. THE ORIGINAL TRANSACTION MAY INCLUDE ADDITIONAL FORMS .... 
EXTENDED DEFINITION OF BODILY INJURY 

Paragraph 3. of DEFINITIONS (Section V) is replaced by the following: 
3. "Bodily injury" means bodily injury, sickness or disease sustained by a person, including mental anguish or death resulting from any of these at any time. 
TRANSFER OF RIGHTS OF RECOVERY 

The following is added to Paragraph 8. Transfer Of Rights Of Recovery Against Others To Us of COM­MERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY CONDITIONS (Sec­tion IV): 
We waive any rights of recovery we may have against any person or organization because of payments we make for injury or damage arising out of your ongoing operations or ''your work" done under a contract with that person or organization and included in the "products-completed operations hazard". This waiver applies only to a person or organization for whom you are required by written contract, agreement or permit to waive these rights of recovery. 
AGGREGATE LIMITS OF INSURANCE -PER LOCATION 
For all sums which the insured becomes legally obli­gated to pay as damages caused by "occurrences" under COVERAGE A (Section I), and for all medical expenses caused by accidents under COVERAGE C (Section I), which can be attributed only to operations at a single "location": 
Paragraphs 2.a. and 2.b. of Limits of Insurance (Sec­tion 111) apply separately to each of your "locations" owned by or rented to you. 
"Location" means premises involving the same or connecting lots, or premises whose connection is interrupted only by a street, roadway, waterway, or right-of-way of a railroad. 
INCREASED MEDICAL EXPENSE LIMIT 
The Medical Expense Limit is amended to $10,000. 
KNOWLEDGE OF OCCURRENCE 
The following is added to Paragraph 2. Duties In The Event Of Occurrence, Offense, Claim Or Suit of COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY CONDITIONS (Section IV): 
Knowledge of an "occurrence", claim or "suit" by your agent, servant or employee shall not in itself constitute knowledge of the named insured unless an officer of the named insured has received such notice from the agent, servant or employee. 
UNINTENTIONAL FAILURE TO DISCLOSE ALL HAZARDS 
The following is added to Paragraph 6. Representa­tions of COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY CONDI­TIONS (Section IV): 
If you unintentionally fail to disclose any hazards ex­isting at the inception date of your policy, we will not deny coverage under this Coverage Form because of such failure. However, this provision does not affect our right to collect additional premium or exercise our right of cancellation or non-renewal. 
LIBERALIZATION CLAUSE 
The following paragraph is added to COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY CONDITIONS (Section IV): 
10. If a revision to this Coverage Part, which would provide more coverage with no additional pre­mium, becomes effective during the policy period in the state shown in the Declarations, your pol­icy will automatically provide this additional cov­erage on the effective date of the revision. 
Page 4 of 4 
AFP-META2-23-PRINT00 1 -0282-0040-V 

COVERAGES CERTIFICATE NUMBER: 1473950847 REVISION NUMBER: 

PSA 19-520GS 
AGREEMENT FOR CITYWIDE ABANDON ITEMS/LITTER REMOVAL SERVICES URBAN CORPS OF SAN DIEGO 
is made and entered into as of the ) 7i:tJ day of -+...Y...........o...----• 2018, by and between the CITY OF CARLSBAD, a municipalcorporati n, ("City"), and URBAN CORPS OF SAN DIEGO, a not-for-profit corporation,("Contractor"). 
RECITALS 
A. City requires the services of a consultant that is experienced in communityimprovement services, specifically removing abandon items from unimproved rights-of-way and city owned open space properties. 
8. Contractor has the necessary experience in providing professional services and advice related to community improvement services. 
C. Contractor has submitted a proposal to City and has affirmed its willingness and ability to perform such work. 
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of these recitals and the mutual covenants contained herein, City and Contractor agree as follows: 
1. SCOPE OF WORK 

City retains Contractor to perform, and Contractor agrees to render, those services (the"Services") that are defined in attached Exhibit "A", which is incorporated by this reference in accordance with this Agreement's terms and conditions. 
2. STANDARD OF PERFORMANCE 

While performing the Services, Contractor will exercise the reasonable professional care and skill customarily exercised by reputable members of Contractor's profession practicing in the Metropolitan Southern California Area, and will use reasonable diligence and best judgment while exercising its professional skill and expertise. 
3. TERM 

The term of this Agreement will be effective for a period of one (1) year from the date first above written. The City Manager may amend the Agreement to extend it for two (2) additional one (1)year periods or parts thereof. Extensions will be based upon a satisfactory review of Contractor's performance, City needs, and appropriation of funds by the City Council. The parties will prepare a written amendment indicating the effective date and length of the extended Agreement. 
4. TIME IS OF THE ESSENCE 

Time is of the essence for each and every provision of this Agreement. 
5. COMPENSATION 

The total fee payable for the Services to be performed during the initial Agreement term will be ninty nine thousand ($99,000) dollars. No other compensation for the Services will be allowed except for items covered by subsequent amendments to this Agreement. If the City elects to extend the Agreement, the amount shall not exceed ninty nine thousand ($99,000) dollars per Agreement year. The City reserves the right to withhold a ten percent (10%) retention until City has accepted the work and/or Services specified in Exhibit "A". 
Incremental payments, if applicable, should be made as outlined in attached Exhibit "A". 
City Attorney Approved Version 6/12/18 













PSA 19-520GS 



6. STATUS OF CONTRACTOR 

Contractor will perform the Services in Contractor's own way as an independent contractor and in pursuit of Contractor's independent calling, and not as an employee of City. Contractor will be under control of City only as to the result to be accomplished, but will consult with City as necessary. The persons used by Contractor to provide services under this Agreement will not be considered employees of City for any purposes. 
The payment made to Contractor pursuant to the Agreement will be the full and complete compensation to which Contractor is entitled. City will not make any federal or state tax withholdings on behalf of Contractor or its agents, employees or subcontractors. City will not be required to pay any workers' compensation insurance or unemployment contributions on behalf of Contractor or its employees or subcontractors. Contractor agrees to indemnify City within thirty 
(30) days for any tax, retirement contribution, social security, overtime payment, unemployment payment or workers' compensation payment which City may be required to make on behalf of Contractor or any agent, employee, or subcontractor of Contractor for work done under this Agreement. At the City's election, City may deduct the indemnification amount from any balance owing to Contractor. 

7. SUBCONTRACTING 

Contractor will not subcontract any portion of the Services without prior written approval of City. If Contractor subcontracts any of the Services, Contractor will be fully responsible to City for the acts and omissions of Contractor's subcontractor and of the persons either directly or indirectly employed by the subcontractor, as Contractor is for the acts and omissions of persons directly employed by Contractor. Nothing contained in this Agreement will create any contractual relationship between any subcontractor of Contractor and City. Contractor will be responsible for payment of subcontractors. Contractor will bind every subcontractor and every subcontractor of a subcontractor by the terms of this Agreement applicable to Contractor's work unless specifically noted to the contrary in the subcontract and approved in writing by City. 

8. OTHER CONTRACTORS 


The City 
reserves the right to employ other Contractors in connection with the Services. 
9. INDEMNIFICATION 


Contractor agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the City and its officers, officials, employees and volunteers from and against all claims, damages, losses and expenses including attorneys fees arising out of the performance of the work described herein caused by any negligence, recklessness, or willful misconduct of the Contractor, any subcontractor, anyone directly or indirectly employed by any of them or anyone for whose acts any of them may be liable. 
The parties expressly agree that any payment, attorney's fee, costs or expense City incurs or makes to or on behalf of an injured employee under the City's self-administered workers' compensation is included as a loss, expense or cost for the purposes of this section, and that this section will survive the expiration or early termination of this Agreement. 

10. INSURANCE 

Contractor will obtain and maintain for the duration of the Agreement and any and all amendments, insurance against claims for injuries to persons or damage to property which may arise out of or in connection with performance of the services by Contractor or Contractor's agents, representatives, employees or subcontractors. The insurance will be obtained from an insurance carrier admitted and authorized to do business in the State of California. The insurance carrier is required to have a current Best's Key Rating of not less than "A-:VII"; OR with a surplus line insurer on the State of California's List of Approved Surplus Line Insurers (LASLI) with a rating 
City Attorney Approved Version 6/12/18 


2 
PSA 19-520GS 
in the latest Best's Key Rating Guide of at least "A:X''; OR an alien non-admitted insurer listed by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) latest quarterly listings report. 
10.1 Coverage and Limits. Contractor will maintain the types of coverage and minimum limits indicated below, unless the Risk Manager or City Manager approves a lower amount. These minimum amounts of coverage will not constitute any limitations or cap on Contractor's indemnification obligations under this Agreement. City, its officers, agents and employees make no representation that the limits of the insurance specified to be carried by Contractor pursuant to this Agreement are adequate to protect Contractor. If Contractor believes that any required insurance coverage is inadequate, Contractor will obtain such additional insurance coverage, as Contractor deems adequate, at Contractor's sole expense. The full limits available to the named insured shall also be available and applicable to the City as an additional insured. 
10.1.1 Commercial General Liability (CGL) Insurance. Insurance written on an "occurrence" basis, including personal & advertising injury, with limits no less than $2,000,000 per occurrence. If a general aggregate limit applies, either the general aggregate limit shall apply separately to this project/location or the general aggregate limit shall be twice the required occurrence limit. 
10.1.2 Automobile Liability.(if the use of an automobile is involved for Contractor's work for City). $2,000,000 combined single-limit per accident for bodily injury and property damage. 
10.1.3 Workers' Compensation and Employer's Liability.Workers' Compensation limits as required by the California Labor Code. Workers' Compensation will not be required if Contractor has no employees and provides, to City's satisfaction, a declaration stating this. 
10.1.4 Professional Liability. Errors and omissions liability appropriate to Contractor's profession with limits of not less than $1,000,000 per claim. Coverage must be maintained for a period of five years following the date of completion of the work. 
10.2 Additional Provisions.Contractor will ensure that the policies of insurance required under this Agreement contain, or are endorsed to contain, the following provisions: 
10.2.1 The City will be named as an additional insured on Commercial General Liability which shall provide primary coverage to the City. 
10.2.2 Contractor will obtain occurrence coverage, excluding Professional Liability, which will be written as claims-made coverage. 
10.2.3 This insurance will be in force during the life of the Agreement and any extensions of it and will not be canceled without thirty (30) days prior written notice to City sent by certified mail pursuant to the Notice provisions of this Agreement. 
10.3 Providing Certificates of Insurance and Endorsements.Prior to City's execution of this Agreement, Contractor will furnish certificates of insurance and endorsements to City. 
10.4 Failure to Maintain Coverage. If Contractor fails to maintain any of these insurance coverages, then City will have the option to declare Contractor in breach, or may purchase replacement insurance or pay the premiums that are due on existing policies in order to maintain the required coverages. Contractor is responsible for any payments made by City to obtain or 
City Attorney Approved Version 6/12/18 









3 
PSA 19-520GS 
maintain insurance and City may collect these payments from Contractor or deduct the amount paid from any sums due Contractor under this Agreement. 
10.5 Submission of Insurance Policies.City reserves the right to require, at any time, complete and certified copies of any or all required insurance policies and endorsements. 
11. BUSINESS LICENSE 

Contractor will obtain and maintain a City of Carlsbad Business License for the term of the Agreement, as may be amended from time-to-time. 
12. ACCOUNTING RECORDS 

Contractor will maintain complete and accurate records with respect to costs incurred under this Agreement. All records will be clearly identifiable. Contractor will allow a representative of City during normal business hours to examine, audit, and make transcripts or copies of records and any other documents created pursuant to this Agreement. Contractor will allow inspection of all work, data, documents, proceedings, and activities related to the Agreement for a period of three 
(3) years from the date of final payment under this Agreement. 
13. OWNERSHIP OF DOCUMENTS 

All work product produced by Contractor or its agents, employees, and subcontractors pursuant to this Agreement is the property of City. In the event this Agreement is terminated, all work product produced by Contractor or its agents, employees and subcontractors pursuant to this Agreement will be delivered at once to City. Contractor will have the right to make one (1) copy of the work product for Contractor's records. 
14. COPYRIGHTS 

Contractor agrees that all copyrights that arise from the services will be vested in City and Contractor relinquishes all claims to the copyrights in favor of City. 
15. NOTICES 

The name of the persons who are authorized to give written notice or to receive written notice on behalf of City and on behalf of Contractor under this Agreement. 
For City For Contractor 




Name Clayton Dobbs Name Yolanda Mader 
Title Public Works Supervisor Title Project Manager 
Department Public Works Address PO Box 80156 
City of Carlsbad San Diego, California 92138 
Address 1635 Faraday Av Phone No. 619-235-6884 
Carlsbad, CA 92008 Email ymader@urbancorps.org 
Phone No. 760-434-2940 

Each party will notify the other immediately of any changes of address that would require any notice or delivery to be directed to another address. 
City Attorney Approved Version 6/12/18 













PSA 19-520GS 



16. CONFLICT OF INTEREST 
Contractor shall file a Conflict of Interest Statement with the City Clerk in accordance with the requirements of the City of Carlsbad Conflict of Interest Code. The Contractor shall reportinvestments or interests in all categories. 
Yes D No . 
17. GENERAL COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS Contractor will keep fully informed of federal, state and local laws and ordinances and regulations which in any manner affect those employed by Contractor, or in any way affect the performance of the Services by Contractor. Contractor will at all times observe and comply with these laws, ordinances, and regulations and will be responsible for the compliance of Contractor's services with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations. 
Contractor will be aware of the requirements of the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 and will comply with those requirements, including, but not limited to, verifying the eligibility for employment of all agents, employees, subcontractors and consultants whose services are required by this Agreement. 
18. DISCRIMINATION AND HARASSMENT PROHIBITED Contractor will comply with all applicable local, state and federal laws and regulations prohibiting discrimination and harassment. 
19. DISPUTE RESOLUTION If a dispute should arise regarding the performance of the Services the following procedure will be used to resolve any questions of fact or interpretation not otherwise settled by agreement between the parties. Representatives of Contractor or City will reduce such questions, and their respective views, to writing. A copy of such documented dispute will be forwarded to both parties involved along with recommended methods of resolution, which would be of benefit to both parties. The representative receiving the letter will reply to the letter along with a recommended method of resolution within ten (10) business days. If the resolution thus obtained is unsatisfactory to the aggrieved party, a letter outlining the disputes will be forwarded to the City Manager. The City Manager will consider the facts and solutions recommended by each party and may then opt to direct a solution to the problem. In such cases, the action of the City Manager will be binding upon the parties involved, although nothing in this procedure will prohibit the parties from seeking remedies available to them at law. 

20. TERMINATION 
In the event of the Contractor's failure to prosecute, deliver, or perform the Services, City may terminate this Agreement for nonperformance by notifying Contractor by certified mail of the termination. If City decides to abandon or indefinitely postpone the work or services contemplated by this Agreement, City may terminate this Agreement upon written notice to Contractor. Upon notification of termination, Contractor has five (5) business days to deliver any documents owned by City and all work in progress to City address contained in this Agreement. City will make a determination of fact based upon the work product delivered to City and of the percentage of work that Contractor has performed which is usable and of worth to City in having the Agreementcompleted. Based upon that finding City will determine the final payment of the Agreement. 
Either party upon tendering thirty (30) days written notice to the other party may terminate this Agreement. In this event and upon request of City, Contractor will assemble the work product and put it in order for proper filing and closing and deliver it to City. Contractor will be paid for work performed to the termination date; however, the total will not exceed the lump sum fee payable 
City Attorney Approved Version 6/12/18 






5 
PSA 19-520GS 
under this Agreement. City will make the final determination as to the portions of tasks completed and the compensation to be made. 
21. COVENANTS AGAINST CONTINGENT FEES 


Contractor warrants that Contractor has not employed or retained any company or person, other than a bona fide employee working for Contractor, to solicit or secure this Agreement, and that Contractor has not paid or agreed to pay any company or person, other than a bona fide emplqyee, any fee, commission, percentage, brokerage fee, gift, or any other consideration contingent upon, or resulting from, the award or making of this Agreement. For breach or violation of this warranty, City will have the right to annul this Agreement without liability, or, in its discretion, to deduct from the Agreement price or consideration, or otherwise recover, the full amount of the fee, commission, percentage, brokerage fees, gift, or contingent fee. 
22. CLAIMS AND LAWSUITS 
By signing this Agreement, Contractor agrees that any Agreement claim submitted to City must be asserted as part of the Agreement process as set forth in this Agreement and not in anticipation of litigation or in conjunction with litigation. Contractor acknowledges that if a false claim is submitted to City, it may be considered fraud and Contractor may be subject to criminal prosecution. Contractor acknowledges that California Government Code sections 12650 et seq., the False Claims Act applies to this Agreement and, provides for civil penalties where a person knowingly submits a false claim to a public entity. These provisions include false claims made with deliberate ignorance of the false information or in reckless disregard of the truth or falsity of information. If City seeks to recover penalties pursuant to the False Claims Act, it is entitled to recover its litigation costs, including attorney's fees. Contractor acknowledges that the filing of a false claim may subject Contractor to an administrative debarment proceeding as the result of which Contractor may be prevented to act as a Contractor on any public work or improvement for a period of up to five (5) years. Contractor acknowledges debarment by another jurisdiction is grounds for City to terminate this Agreement. 
23. JURISDICTION AND VENUE 
Any action at law or in equity brought by either of the parties for the purpose of enforcing a right or rights provided for by this Agreement will be tried in a court of competent jurisdiction in the County of San Diego, State of California, and the parties waive all provisions of law providing for a change of venue in these proceedings to any other county. 
24. SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS 
It is mutually understood and agreed that this Agreement will be binding upon City and Contractor and their respective successors. Neither this Agreement nor any part of it nor any monies due or to become due under it may be assigned by Contractor without the prior consent of City, which shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
25. ENTIRE AGREEMENT 
This Agreement, together with any other written document referred to or contemplated by it, along with the purchase order for this Agreement and its provisions, embody the entire Agreement and understanding between the parties relating to the subject matter of it. In case of conflict, the terms of the Agreement supersede the purchase order. Neither this Agreement nor any of its provisions may be amended, modified, waived or discharged except in a writing signed by both parties. 



City Attorney Approved Version 6/12/18 
6 

PSA 19-520GS 
26. AUTHORITY 
The individuals executing this Agreement and the instruments referenced in it on behalf of Contractor each represent and warrant that they have the legal power, right and actual authority to bind Contractor to the terms and conditions of this Agreement. 
CITY OF CARLSBAD, a municipalcorporation of the State of California 
ity Manager 
ATTEST: 
By: 

w \L/21Y/,__7J(L.,b.
(sign here) BARBARA ENGLESON City Clerk 
.v.1<i..,_!" lcFv
• (prirft narfle/title) 
If required by City, proper notarial acknowledgment of execution by contractor must be attached. If 
a corporation, Agreement must be signed by one corporate officer from each of the following 
Group A Group B Chairman, Secretary,President, or Assistant Secretary, Vice-President CFO or Assistant Treasurer 
Otherwise, the corporation must attach a resolution certified by the secretary or assistant secretary under corporate seal empowering the officer(s) signing to bind the corporation. 
APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
CELIA A BREWER, City Attorney 
(print name/title) 




Deputy City Attorney 

City Attorney Approved Version 6/12/18 

PSA 19-520GS 
EXHIBIT "A" SCOPE OF SERVICES 

CITYWIDE ABANDON ITEMS AND LITTER REMOVAL SERVICES 
Contractor will provide citywide abandon items/litter removal services. General labor services will be provided as needed and as determined by the city's Contract Manager. All trash will be disposed of at a site approved by the Contract Manager from the City of Carlsbad. 
CREW: 
1. 
Crew must consist of one supervisor, and a minimum of two crew members who can, safely lift, up to 50 pounds unassisted. Contractor shall be able to read, write and speak English.

2. 
Contractor will provide a mobile smart phone for supervisor of crew. 

3. 
Contractor will provide all personal protective equipment, vehicles (stake bed with lift gate), traffic control devices, hand tools, (55 gallon) heavy-duty trash bags, and uniforms necessary to complete assigned task. 


FEE: 
Description  Quantity(EA)  Maximum Hours  Hourly Rate  Cost  
Supervisor  1.0  1520  $30.00  $45,600  
Corpsmember Labor Vehicle Fuel  2.0 1.0  1520 10  $17.25 $96  $52,440 $960.00  

Total amount not to exceed per agreement year"  $99,000  

* Includes all taxes and fees 

City Attorney Approved Version 6/12/18 

To: Clayton Dobbs Public Work Department 405 Oak Avenue Carlsbad, CA 92008 
Phone: (760) 434-2980 I Fax: (760) 720-9562 
Clayton.Dobbs@carlsbadca.gov 
Date: 8/22/2018 
Re: Cost Estimate/Project Proposal 
Project: City of Carlsbad Crew Two Litter Removal 
Scope of Work: Urban Corps of San Diego County, will provide an Supervised crew of two corpsmebers, four (4) days per week, for up to 8hrs per day, including traval time, to assist with Extraordinary Labor in the City of Carlsbad. 

DESCRIPTION QTY. UNIT UNIT PRICE COST 
City of Carlsbad Crew 2 Litter Removal, 4-days per week for 12 months. 

Subtotal Total 1 $ 
99,000.00 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA -THE RESOURCES AGENCY EDMUND G. BROWN, JR., Govemor 
CALIFORNIA CONSERVATION CORPS 
Executive Office 
1719 24" Slreel, Sacramento, CA 95816 (916) 341-31 26 www.cccca.gov 
March 30, 2018 SENT VTA EMAJL 

Robert Chavez, Chief Executive Officer 
Urban conservation Corps of San Diego County 3127 Jefferson Street 
San Diego, CA 921e10 
Dear Robert, 
Thank you for your time and -effort in hosting the January 4., 2018 certification review visit. The CCC review team did not identify any statutory deficiencies and Urban Corps of San Diego County (Urban Corps) meets all oertificalion requirements. Urban Corps is certified as a Communrty Conservat·ion Corps for fiscal year 2018/2019 (July 1, 2018 -June 30, 2019), in accordance with CaHfomia Public Resources Code,e§ 14507.5. 
If there are any questions regarding Urban Corps· certification status, please contact Ka-Ryn Escovedo, CCC Local Corps Analyst, at 916.341.3126 or ka.ryn.escovedo@ccc.ca.gov. 
Sincerely, 

Amy Ca ron 
Chief Deputy Director 
Community Conservation Corps Certification Report URBAN CORPS OF SAN DIEGO COUNTY 

CalRecycle/California Conservation Corps 
CERTIFICATION REVIEW REPORT 
Review Period: 2016/2017 Fiscal Year 
Community Conservation Corps:  Urban Corps of San Diego County  
Executive Director/CEO  Robert Chavez  
Certification Staff Lead:  Yolanda Maeder I Date of Visit: January 4, 2018  
Report Prepared By:  Ka-Ryn Escovedo, CCC Local Corps Program Analyst  

Report Approved By: _r___,_rmr,_=-ameron.._=CC...;:Cr==frDa.:ep..,.ty....,Dire=cto:.a.r ____ A.::..;:.:..yrC=='""""'"' . C=r::.:.hier-= ....u_. .___ =r____ 
Name and Title 
Signature: ....&..l..c...&.;;.._,p.,-------------------Date: ztIzs I/'ZPffs 
OVERALL SUMMARY: 
1. Does the Community Conservation Corps meet the certification standards for each criterion? Describe any areas of concern or deficiencies. 
Urban Corps of San Diego County (Urban Corps) meets the certification standards for each criterion outlined in the Community Conservation Corps Manual, Revised June 2017. The California Conservation Corps (CCC) Certification Review Team examined organizational, educational, and programmatic documentation during the week of December 16, 2017, and observed Urban Corps operations on January 4, 2018. Based on the review and site visit, the CCC certifies Urban Cor
ps for the 2018/2019 fiscal year. 
2. What are your general comments? 
During the review period 2016/2017, Urban Corps became the largest certified conservation corps in the state based on annual corpsmember enrollment. overtaking Los Angeles Conservation Corps for the top spot. This is a significant achievement for Urban Corps, especially in the current climate of many conservation corps facing recruitment challenges and lower enrollment numbers. It is clear that Urban Corps' achievements are based in part on a proactive and innovative approach to project/contract procurement and strategic partnerships with numerous organizations providing corpsmember support services, in addition to its charter school operations and career development services that are well established. Among Urban Corps' many project accomplishments during the 2016/2017 review period was the expansion of its land management program -Urban Corps now manages 15 preserves as a registered land manager through California Fish and Wildlife. 

Community Conservation Corps Certification Report URBAN CORPS OF SAN DIEGO COUNTY 
For the following criteria, provide a narrative related to each rating. Report on the documentation, review activities conducted, and/or information that justify the mark given in the box. 
CRITERIA  PASS  FAIL  Recommend Corrective Action  Recommend Further Documentation  
AVERAGE ENROLLMENT: The corps consists of an average annual enrollment of not fess than 50 corpsmembers between 18 and 25 years of age. (PRC § 14507.5[a}[5})  X  

NARRATIVE RELATED TO RATING: 
Urban Corps' average annual enrollment for the 2016/2017 fiscal year was 212 corpsmembers. Urban Corps submitted the signed Corpsmember Enrollment Certification Form, certifying that corpsmembers counted in the average annual enrollment during the review period were between the ages of 18 and 25, enrolled participants in the conservation corps work program by spending at least 30 hours per month participating in training and rigorous work on public projects, and have signed corpsmember contracts/agreements. 
The Review Team examined payroll records for the months of November 2016 and June 2017 to substantiate the Corpsmember Enrollment Certification Form, and no discrepancies were identified. 
Optional Data: For the 2016/2017 review period, corps may submit additional payroll data to demonstrate 30,000 hours per year of corpsmember paid labor and training, an alternative corpsmember definition proposed by the California Association of Local Conservation Corps (CALCC). This data will be reviewed after the certification cycle concludes, for the purposes of evaluating the current Pilot Program, which requires 30 hours of paid labor and training per corpsmember. Urban Corps submitted payroll documentation with a total of 222,429 total corpsmember paid hours. 
CRITERIA  PASS  FAIL  Recommend Corrective Action  Recommend Further Documentation  
ORGANIZED CREW STRUCTURE: The corps is organized in the form of supervised work crews. (PRC § 14507.5[a}[1})  X  

NARRATIVE RELATED TO RATING: 
To verify Urban Corps is organized in the form of supervised work crews, the Review Team requested copies of supervisors' daily crew rosters, crew supervisor minimum qualifications and/or job specifications, and one year of training records for crew supervisors. Urban Corps submitted: 
• 
Daily crew rosters for multiple crews for the weeks of November 14, 2016 and February 6, 2018 with supervisor signature and crew attendance. 

• 
Job description for Urban Corps' crew supervisor position, which lists the position summary, principal responsibilities, position requirements and qualifications, and requirements of workplace. 

• 
Crew supervisor training records for 2016/2017, which included training in workplace privacy, business ethics, stress management, and working safely outdoors. 


Urban Corps' documentation was complete and no issues were identified. 
Community Conservation Corps Certification Report URBAN CORPS OF SAN DIEGO COUNTY 
CRITERIA  PASS  FAIL  Recommend Corrective Action  Recommend Further Documentation  
HIRING PRACTICES: Participation shall be for a period of one year, and may be extended. (PRC § 14507.5[a][1]) The corps selects young men and women for participation on the basis of motivation for hard work, personal development, and public service, without regard for their prior employment or educational background and consistent with Section 14402. (PRC § 14507.5falf11)  X  

NARRATIVE RELATED TO RATING: 
To verify that Urban Corps' program is for one year with the possibility of extension, Urban Corps submitted a copy of its corpsmember handbook which states the "job training program is approximately one year,based on satisfactory performance, attendance, and how many credits are needed to earn a high school diploma. [Corpsmembers] are given the opportunity to extend their one-year contract with written request." 
To verify that Urban Corps is in compliance with the hiring practices stated in PRCe§ 14507.5[a][1], the Review T earn examined documentation related to recruitment, the application process, Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO), and high school diploma status upon entering the program. Urban Corps submitted: 
• 
Corpsmember recruitment materials with eligibility information, advertising education and training opportunities.

• 
Job training application to join Urban Corps. 

• 
EEO policy information and designated EEO Officer, which is the Human Resources Manager. 

• 
List of corpsmembers who enrolled during the 2016/2017 fiscal year and their high school diploma status upon enrollment. Urban Corps had 380 new corpsmembers enroll, with 7 entering the program already having received a high school diploma. 


The Review T earn also verified that EEO information is posted in an area visible to corpsmembers. 
Urban Corps' documentation was complete and no issues were identified. 
CRITERIA  PASS  FAIL  Recommend Corrective Action  Recommend Further Documentation  
WAGE SCALE AND POST PLACEMENT: The corps compensates corpsmembers at not less than the federal minimum wage.(PRC § 14507.5[a][3]) The corps provides corpsmembers assistance in obtaining permanent employment following their participation in the corps program. (PRC § 14507.5[a][3])  X  

NARRATIVE RELATED TO RATING: 
Urban Corps paid corpsmembers $10.50 and $11.00 per hour during the review period, which was the State of California Minimum Wage at the time. This rate is higher than the federal minimum wage of $7.25. 
To verify that Urban Corps provides corpsmembers assistance in obtaining permanent employment, the Review Team requested documentation outlining Urban Corps' post-corps employment assistance plan, listing programs and services for job training and career development, as well as a list of job-specific skills available to corpsmembers and post-corps placement statistics. Urban Corps submitted: 
• Description of Urban Corps' Corps-to-Career program, which provides career development services and case management, as well additional resources available to corpsmembers. 
Community Conservation Corps Certification Report URBAN CORPS OF SAN DIEGO COUNTY 
• 
Description of job-specific skills corpsmembers can learn participating in different departments, including environmental services, community improvement, recycling, and construction. 

• 
Post-corps placement tracking sheet, indicating that Urban Corps tracks corpsmembers' exit date, employment, and education status. 


To substantiate the post-corps employment assistance plan submitted by Urban Corps, the Review Team examined career/employability files for 10 corpsmembers. These files demonstrated that corpsmembers receive career development and support services. 
Urban Corps' documentation was complete and no issues were identified. 
CRITERIA  PASS  FAIL  Recommend Corrective Action  Recommend Further Documentation  
EDUCATIONAL PROGRAM: The educational component of the corps' program includes enrollment in a vocational education program, public or charier high school, or postsecondary community college. (PRC § 14507.5[a][2]) The Corps shall give priority to providing an educational component for corpsmembers who have not completed high school. The component shall be equal in content to a high school curriculum and provide course credits leading to a high school diploma or its equivalent, such as a California high school equivalency cerlificate. The work of the Corps shall be structured to accommodate the educational component without significantly reducing the productivity of the Corps. (PRC § 14402)  X  

NARRATIVE RELATED TO RATING: 
To verify that Urban Corps' charter school is in compliance with PRCe§ 14507.5[a][2] and PRCe§ 14402, the 
Review Team requested a copy of Urban Corps' most recent charter school accreditation by the Western Association of Schools and Colleges (WASC), official documentation demonstrating approval or renewal of the charter, a graduation list for Urban Corps corpsmembers for the 2016/2017 fiscal year, and a list of education goals and objectives for corpsmembers who already have a high school diploma. 
Urban Corps submitted: 
• 
WASC letter dated July 3, 2016 accrediting Urban Corps of San Diego County Charter School through June 30, 2022. 

• 
Evidence of charter renewal by the Mono County Office of Education, signed July 1, 2016. 

• 
List of corpsmembers who graduated from the charter school during the 2016/2017 fiscal year, which was 65. 

• 
Description of learning objectives for corpsmembers with a high school diploma, which includes requiring corpsmembers to attend college, vocational education, or continuing education classes. 


The CCC lead reviewer confirmed with the Mono County Board of Education that Urban Corps' charter is currently active with no suspensions or revocations. 
To verify that Urban Corps' educational component does not significantly reduce the productivity of the Corps (PRCe§ 14402), the Review Team also requested copies of school attendance records and a description of Urban Corps' work-school attendance model. Urban Corps submitted daily attendance reports for the weeks of September 26-30, 2016 and April 17-21, 2017. Student corpsmembers attend school two days per week and work three days per week. Schedules vary. 
Urban Corps' documentation was complete and no issues were identified. 
Community Conservation Corps Certification Report URBAN CORPS OF SAN DIEGO COUNTY 
CRITERIA  PASS  FAIL  Recommend Corrective Action  Recommend Further Documentation  
CIVIC CONSCIOUSNESS: The corps' program develops corpsmembers' character and civic consciousness through rigorous work on public projects. (PRC § 14507.5[a][2])  X  

NARRATIVE RELATED TO RATING: 
To verify that Urban Corps' program develops corpsmembers' character and civic consciousness, the Review Team requested a list of work ethic standards from a corpsmember handbook/agreement, a description of civic consciousness activities that corpsmembers participate in, and a description of how Urban Corps rewards and recognizes corpsmembers, with samples of awards and/or certificates. Urban Corps submitted: 
• 
Corpsmember handbook with description of personal qualities, grooming standards, and behavior appropriate for success in the corps. 

• 
A list of civic-consciousness classes and events, including encouraging voting in the November 2016 elections and participating in Government Education Day. 

• 
Description of corpsmember incentive program and awards offered, including Safety Award, Perfect Attendance, and Corpsmember of the Month. 


Urban Corps' documentation was complete and no issues were identified. 

NARRATIVE RELATED TO RATING: 
To verify that Urban Corps engages in both recycling/litter abatement projects and projects that accomplish conservationist purposes as described in PRC § 14300, and assists local government and nonprofit organizations, the Review Team requested Urban Corps' project list for the 2016/2017 fiscal year, as well as, copies of project evaluations or completion letters from agencies/organizations. Urban Corps submitted: 
• 
Project list with sponsor, type of work, and date. Sponsors include City of Chula Vista (brush abatement), Riverwalk Golf Course (drainage clearing), City of San Diego (tree trimming), and Oceanside Mesa LLC (land management). 

• 
Documents demonstrating satisfactory and completed work, including a Notice of Completion filed by the City of Poway (park construction) and emails from the Carlsbad Village Association (neighborhood cleanup) and City of San Diego (tire removal). 


Urban Corps' documentation was complete and no issues were identified. 
The Review Team also visited an active project on the day of the visit, where corpsmembers were performing street maintenance and litter abatement. The Review Team conducted interviews with four corpsmembers and a supervisor. 
Community Conservation Corps Certification Report URBAN CORPS OF SAN DIEGO COUNTY 
CRITERIA  PASS  FAIL  Recommend Corrective Action  Recommend Further Documentation  
DESIGNATION: The corps has been designated by a fj1)L (or city and county) to perform litter abatement, recycling, and related activities, if the city or city and county has a population of more than 250,000 persons. (PRC § 14581.1[a][1]) OR the corps has been designated by a county to perform litter abatement, recycling, and related activities. (PRC § 14581.1[a][2])  X  

NARRATIVE RELATED TO RATING: 
To demonstrate that Urban Corps has been designated by a city to perform litter abatement, recycling, and related activities, Urban Corps submitted a contract from the City of San Diego to perform recycling for stadium events. The contract term was 10/13/14 -06/19/19 
Urban Corps' documentation was complete and no issues were identified. 
CRITERIA  PASS  FAIL  Recommend Corrective Action  Recommend Further Documentation  
ANNUAL BUDGET: Any grants provided pursuant to this paragraph shall not comprise more than 75 percent of the annual budget of a Community Conservation Corps. (PRC§ 14581.1[b])  X  

NARRATIVE RELATED TO RATING: 
Urban Corps provided the Statement of Activities from its Independent Auditor's Report for fiscal year 2016/2017, showing a total revenue of $9,994,688. The 2016/2017 total grant allocation from CalRecycle (Cycle 31) was $1,673,620, which is 17% of Urban Corps' total revenue. 
Urban Corps' documentation was complete and no issues were identified. 
Recommend Recommend 
CRITERIA FAIL 
Corrective 
Further Action 
PASS 
Documentation 
CALIFORNIA SECRETARY OF STATE STATUS: 
"Community Conservation Corps" means a nonprofit public benefit corporation formed or operating pursuant to Part 2 
X
(commencing with Section 51 1 OJ of Division 2 of Title 1 of the Corporations Code, or an agency operated by a city, county, or city and county ... (PRC § 14507.Sa) 
NARRATIVE RELATED TO RATING: 
In December 2017, the Review Team verified that Urban Corps is in active standing with the California Secretary of State to do business as a non-profit public benefit corporation, in compliance with PRCe§ 14507.5a. 
URBAN-7 OP IU: KV 
ACORD' DA TE (MM/DDIYYYYl 
CERTIFICATE OF LIABILITY INSURANCE 
.--11/07/2017 
I 
THIS CERTIFICATE IS ISSUED AS A MATTER OF INFORMATION ONLY AND CONFERS NO RIGHTS UPON THE CERTIFICATE HOLDER. THIS CERTIFICATE DOES NOT AFFIRMATIVELY OR NEGATIVELY AMEND, EXTEND OR ALTER THE COVERAGE AFFORDED BY THE POLICIES BELOW. THIS CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE DOES NOT CONSTITUTE A CONTRACT BETWEEN THE ISSUING INSURER(S), AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OR PRODUCER, AND THE CERTIFICATE HOLDER. 
IMPORTANT: If the certificate holder is an ADDITIONAL INSURED, the policy(ies) must be endorsed. If SUBROGATION IS WAIVED, subject to the terms and conditions of the policy, certain policies may require an endorsement A statement on this certificate does not confer rights to the 
certificate holder in lieu of such endorsement(s). 
PRODUCER 
Faith Insurance Services 4241 Jutland Drive, Suite 110 San Diego, CA 92117 Charles A. Faith 
INSURED Urban Corps of San Diego County PO Box 80156 San Diego, CA 92138 
2.tl1CT Keri Vogt ri:,gEN :o E)jl: 949-365-5144 Nol: 949-313-3288
I r.. 
J.J.ss, keri.vontt?ilsia.us 
I
INSURER(S) AFFORDING COVERAGE 
NAICE# INSURER A: American States Insurance 
19704 
INSURER B: General Ins. Co. of America INSUREREC: INSURERED: INSURERE: INSURER F: 
COVERAGES CERTIFICATE NUMBER: REVISION NUMBER· 

City of Carlsbad/CMWD 
c/o Exigis Insurance Compliance Services 
P. 0. Box 468-ECM #35050 New York, NY 10163--4668 
I 
SHOULD ANY OF THE ABOVE DESCRIBED POLICIES BE CANCELLED BEFORE THE EXPIRATION DATE THEREOF, NOTICE WILL BE DELIVERED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE POLICY PROVISIONS. 

© 1988-2014 ACORD CORPORATION. All rights reserved. ACORD 25 (2014/01) The ACORD name and logo are registered marks of ACORD 
POLICY NO. 24-CC-287662-8 
.... REPR1NTED FROM THE ARCHIVE THE ORIGINAL TRANSACTION MAY INCLUDE ACDIT ONAL FORMS "" 

., Libe. Mutual, COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY . INSURANCE CG 76 35 02 07 
THIS ENDORSEMENT CHANGES THE POLICY. PLEASE READ IT CAREFULLY. 
LIABILITY PLUS ENDORSEMENT 
This endorsement modifies insurance provided under the following: COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY COVERAGE PART 
SCHEDULE Name of Person or Organization: 
ADDITIONAL INSURED 
BY WRITTEN CONTRACT, AGREEMENT OR PERMIT, OR SCHEDULE 
The following paragraph is added to WHO IS AN INSURED (Section 11): 
4. Any person or organization shown in the Sched­ule or for whom you are required by written con­tract, agreement or permit to provide insurance is an insured, subject to the following additional provisions: 
a. 
The contract, agreement or permit must be in effect during the policy period shown in the Declarations, and must have been exe­cuted prior to the "bodily injury", "property damage", or "personal and advertising injury". 

b. 
The person or organization added as an in­


sured by this endorsement is an insured only to the extent you are held liable due to: 
(1) The ownership, maintenance or use of that part of premises you own, rent, lease or occupy, subject to the following additional provisions: 
(a) 
This insurance does not apply to any "occurrence" which takes place after you cease to be a tenant in any premises leased to or rented to you; 

(b) 
This insurance does not apply to any structural alterations, new con­struction or demolition operations performed by or on behalf of the person or organization added as an insured; 


(2) 
Your ongoing operations for that in­

sured, whether the work is performed by you or for you; 

(3) 
The maintenance, operation or use by you of equipment leased to you by such person or organization, subject to the following additional provisions: 


(a) This insurance does not apply to any "occurrence" which takes place after the equipment lease expires; 
Includes Copyrighted Material of Insurance Services Office, Inc., with its permission. Copyright, Insurance Services, 2001 
CG 76 35 02 07 Page 1 of 4 EP 
AFP-META2-2iJ.PRINTOOl•021l2•0037•V 
•••• REPRINTED FROM THE ARCHIVE. THE ORIGINAL TRANSACTION MAY INCLUDE ADDITIONAL FORMS •••• 
(b) This insurance does not apply to "bodily injury" or "property dam­age" arising out of the sole negli­gence of such pe rson or organization; 
(4) Permits issued by any state or political subdivision with respect to operations performed by you or on your behalf, subject to the following additional pro­vision: 
This insurance does not apply to "bodily injury", "property damage", or "personal and advertising injury" arising out of operations performed for the state or municipality. 
c. 
The insurance with respect to any architect, engineer, or surveyor added as an insured by this endorsement does not apply to "bodily injury", "property damage", or "per­sonal and advertising injury" arising out of the rendering of or the failure to render any professional services by or for you, includ­ing: 

(1 ) The preparing, approving, or failing to prepare or approve maps, drawings, opinions, reports, surveys, change or­ders, designs or specifications; and 
(2) Supervisory, inspection or engineering services. 

d. 
This insurance does not apply to "bodily injury" or "property damage" included within the "products-completed operations haz­ard". 


A person's or organization's status as an insured un­der this endorsement ends when your operations for that insured are completed. 
No coverage will be provided if, in the absence of this endorsement, no liability would be imposed by law on you. Coverage shall be limited to the extent of your negligence or fault according to the applicable princi­ples of comparative fault. 
NON-OWNED WATERCRAFT AND NON-OWNED AIRCRAFT LIABILITY 
Exclusion g. of COVERAGE A (Section I) is replaced by the following: 
g. "Bodily injury" or "property damage" arising out of the ownership, maintenance, use or entrustment to others of any aircraft, "auto" or watercraft owned or operated by or rented or loaned to any insured. Use includes oper­ation and "loading or unloading". 
Page 
This exclusion applies even if the claims against any insured allege negligence or other wrongdoing in the supervision, hiring, employment, training or monitoring of others by that insured, if the "occurrence " which caused the ''bodily injury" or "property damage" involved the ownership, mainte­nance, use or entrustment to others of any aircraft, "auto" or watercraft that is owned or operated by or rented or loaned to any in­sured. 
This exclusion does not apply to: 
(1 ) A watercraft while ashore on premises you own or rent; 
(2) 
A watercraft you do not own that is: 

(a) 
Less than 52 feet long; and 

(b) 
Not being used to carry persons or property for a charge; 



(3) 
Parking an "auto" on, or on the ways next to, premises you own or rent, pro­vided the "auto" is not owned by or rented or loaned to you or the insured; 

(4) 
Liability assumed under any "insured contract" for the ownership, mainte­nance or use of aircraft or watercraft; or 

(5) 
"Bodily injury" or "property damage" arising out of: 

(a) 
the operation of machinery or equipment that is attached to, or part of, a land vehicle that would qualify under the definition of "mobile equipment" if it were not subject to a compulsory or financial responsibility law or other motor ve­hicle insurance law in the state where it is licensed or principally garaged; or 

(b) 
the operation of any of the machin­ery or equipment listed in Paragraph f.(2) or f.(3) of the definition of "mobile equipment". 



(6) 
An aircraft you do not own provided it is not operated by any insured. 


TENANTS ' PROPERTY DAMAGE LIABILITY 
When a Damage To Premises Rented To You Limit is shown in the Declarations, Exclusion j. of Coverage A, Section I is replaced by the following: 
j. Damage To Property 
"Property damage" to: 
(1 ) Property you own, rent, or occupy, including any costs or expenses incurred by you, or 
2 of 4 

AFP,M ETA2-23-PRINT00 1-0282· 0038•V 
.... REPRINTED FROM TI,E ARCHIVE. 1l7E ORIGINAL TRANSACTION MAY INCLUDE ADDITIONAL FORMS .... 
any other person, organization or entity, for repair, replacement, enhancement, restora­tion or maintenance of such property for any reason, including prevention of injury to a person or damage to another's property; 
(2) 
Premises you sell, give away or abandon, if the "property damage" arises out of any part of those premises; 

(3) 
Property loaned to you; 

(4) 
Personal property in the care, custody or control of the insured; 

(5) 
That particular part of real property on which you or any contractors or subcontractors working directly or indirectly on your behalf are performing operations, if the "property damage" arises out of those operations, or 

(6) 
That particular part of any property that must be restored, repaired or replaced because "your work" was incorrectly performed on it. 


Paragraphs (1 ), (3) and (4) of this exclusion do not apply to "property damage" (other than damage by fire) to premises, including the con­tents of such premises, rented to you. A separate limit of insurance applies to Damage To Prem­ises Rented To You as described in Section Ill -Limits Of Insurance. 
Paragraph (2) of this exclusion does not apply if the premises are "your work" and were never occupied, rented or held for rental by you. 
Paragraphs (3), (4), (5) and (6) of this exclusion do not apply to liability assumed under a side­track agreement. 
Paragraph (6) of this exclusion does not apply to "property damage'' included in the "products­completed operations hazard". 
Paragraph 6. of LIMITS OF INSURANCE (Section Ill) is replaced by the following: 
6. Subject to 5. above, the Damage To Premises Rented To You Limit is the most we will pay un­der Coverage A for damages because of "property damage" to any one premises, while rented to you, or in the case of damage by fire, while rented to you or temporarily occupied by you with permission of the owner. 
The Damage To Premises Rented To You limit is the higher of the Each Occurrence Limit shown in the Declarations or the amount shown in the Declarations as Damage To Premises Rented To You Limit. 
WHO IS AN INSURED -MANAGERS 
The following is added to Paragraph 2.a. of WHO IS AN INSURED (Section II): 
Paragraph (1 ) does not apply to executive officers, or to managers at the supervisory level or above. 
SUPPLEMENTARY PAYMENTS -COVERAGES A AND B -BAIL BONDS -TIME OFF FROM WORK 
Paragraph 1.b. of SUPPLEMENTARY PAYMENTS ­COVERAGES A AND B is replaced by the following: 
b. Up to $3,000 for cost of bail bonds required because of accidents or traffic law violations arising out of the use of any vehicle to which the Bodily Injury Liability Coverage applies. We do not have to furnish these bonds. 
Paragraph 1.d. of SUPPLEMENTARY PAYMENTS COVERAGES A AND B is replaced by the following: 
d. All reasonable expenses incurred by the in­sured at our request to assist us in the in­vestigation or defense of the claim or ''Suit ", including actual loss of earnings up to $500 a day because of time off from work. 
EMPLOYEES AS INSUREDS -HEAL TH CARE SERVICES 
Provision 2.a.(1)(d) of WHO IS AN INSURED (Section 
II) is deleted, unless excluded by separate endorse­ment. 
EXTENDED COVERAGE FOR NEWLY ACQUIRED ORGANIZATIONS 
Provision 3.a. of WHO IS AN INSURED (Section II) is replaced by the following: 
a. Coverage under this provision is afforded only until the end of the policy period. 
EXTENDED "PROPERTY DAMAGE" 
Exclusion a. of COVERAGE A (Section I) is replaced by the following: 
a. "Bodily injury" or "property damage" expected or intended from the standpoint of the insured. This exclusion does not apply to "bodily injury" or "property damage" resulting from the use of reasonable force to protect persons or property. 
CG 76 35 02 07 Page 3 of 4 EP 
AFP-M ETA2-23· PRINT00 1 ·0282· 0039•V 
., .. REPRINTED FROM THE ARCHIVE THE ORIGINAL TRANSACTION MAY INCLUDEAEOIT'.ONALFORMS "" 
EXTENDED DEFINITION OF BODILY INJURY 
Paragraph 3. of DEFINITIONS (Section V) Is replaced by the following: 
3. "Bodily injury" means bodily injury, sickness or disease sustained by a person, including mental anguish or death resulting from any of these at anyctime. 
TRANSFER OF RIGHTS OF RECOVERY 
The following is added to Paragraph 8. Transfer Of Rights Of Recovery Against Others To Us of COM­MERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY CONDITIONS (Sec­tion IV): 
We waive any rights of recovery we may have against any person or organization because of payments we make for injury or damage arising out of your ongoing operations or "your work" done under a contract with that person or organization and included in the "products-completed operations hazard". This waiver applies only to a person or organization for whom you are required by written contract, agreement or permitto waive these rights of recovery. 
AGGREGATE LIMITS OF INSURANCE -PER LOCATION 
For all sums which the insured becomes legally obli­gated to pay as damages caused by "occurrencesc" under COVERAGE A (Section I), and for all medical expenses caused by accidents under COVERAGE C (Section I), which can be attributed only to operations at a single "location": 
Paragraphs 2.a. and 2.b. of Limits of Insurance (Sec­tion 111) apply separately to each of your "locations" owned by or rented to you. 
"Location" means premises involving the same or connecting lots, or premises whose connection is interrupted only by a street, roadway, waterway, or right-of-way of a railroad. 
INCREASED MEDICAL EXPENSE LIMIT 
The Medical Expense Limit is amended to $10,000. 
KNOWLEDGE OF OCCURRENCE 
The following is added to Paragraph 2. Duties In The Event Ot Occurrence, Offense, Claim Or Suit of COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY CONDITIONS (Section IV): 
Knowledge of an "occurrence", claim or "suit" by your agent, servant or employee shall not in itself constitute knowledge of the named insured unless an officer of the named insured has received such notice from the agent, servant or employee. 
UNINTENTIONAL FAILURE TO DISCLOSE ALL HAZARDS 
The following is added to Paragraph 6. Representa­tions of COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY CONDI­TIONS (Section IV): 
If you unintentionally fail to disclose any hazards ex­isting at the inception date of your policy, we will not deny coverage under this Coverage Form because of such failure. However, this provision does not affect our right to collect additional premium or exercise our right of cancellation or non-renewal. 
LIBERALIZATION CLAUSE 
The following paragraph is added to COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY CONDITIONS (Section IV): 
10. If a revision to this Coverage Part, which would provide more coverage with no additional pre­mium, becomes effective during the policy period in the state shown in the Declarations, your pol­icy will automatically provide this additional cov­erage on the effective date of the revision. 
Page 4 of 4 
AFN.1ETA2·23•PRINTOOl•0282·0040•V 
•·•• REPRINTED FROM THE ARCHIVE. THE ORIGNAL TRANSACTION MAY INCLUDE ADD TIONAL FORMS "" 


., Lihe!."!}.'. Mutual. . fNSI/RANCE  COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY CG 20 26 07 04  
POLICY NUMBER:  24 -CC-2 87 662-8  
THIS  ENDORSEMENT  CHANGES  THE POLICY.  PLEASE  READ IT CAREFULLY.  

ADDITIONAL INSURED -DESIGNATED PERSON OR ORGANIZATION 
This endorsement modifies insurance provided under the following: 
COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY COVERAGE PART 
SCHEDULE 
Name Of Addltlonal Insured Person(s) Or Organlzatlon(s) 
ANY AND ALL FUNDING SOURCES AS RESPECTS THE INSURED 'S OPERATIONS 
Information required to complete this Schedule, if not shown above, will be shown in the Declarations. 
Section II -Who Is An Insured is amended to include as an additional insured the person(s) or organization(s) shown in the Schedule, but only with respect to liability for "bodily injuryp , "property damage" or "personal and advertising injury" caused, in whole or in part, by your acts or omissions or the acts or omissions of those acting on your behalf: 
A. In the performance of your ongoing operations; or 
B. In connection with your premises owned by or rented to you. 
. ISO Properties, Inc., 2004 

CG 20 26 07 Ol EP 
AFP-META2·23-PRINT001·02ll2•00Y.-V 
. . . . . . . . . 
........ 
.I ...INIH) .. h!n.J: IHl-'."-H'i>tlvt:-· ! r-e:-.:Ii r.r..ii111 ll-fJ....ISA1:1 rm U.Y Nl:J'l ll::,.11 :1 1c:1..u-1 t-rlt,.!Mc..:; H...-
POLICY NO. 24CC32842-1 
·coM ME. c l,AL 41..lTO CA 71 ·10 03' U7 
THlS ENDORSEMENT CHANGES THE POLK:V, PLEASE READ ff CAREFUU. Y. 
AUTO PLUS ENDORSEMENT 
T1is endorsement l'liodiN<Js· lm:itlta,il:o µrvv.'dcd .:mdo, t,ic fo.luwlt.19; gus,.JrnS ,\JJTO COVEAI\G,E FORM 
Wl!h 
tQ,.:,p.1 10 04Ml..g., ;:i,c,,:id.d t,y ft)iS Md1Jn;(-l'l.r1h I.. p(OYISi?rl" 1'1 t•1t1 c,iv.•.g. .mrri .!-!pp_•'( IJr'l.t-S 
rn.iliert'ty tt1A P.ndorsP.rnP-nt. 
EXTEr.,OEO CANCE.LLATtON C.ON_DITION 
P51s.g1-s.pn .2.b .. of tau CA.NCi::'.L ... AJION Co..-n,-no.1 Po--i{:'( CO'lrlitio11 !i re.r_l;:..{:. by t'"lfl !oliowi119:. 
b. qr; duy. catore the 
offE.iva tlat. :Jf c.ancclfc:..t:qn if wa carca• for e"ly ot'lor rooson. 
"c
TEMP.ORA.gy SUB$"nTUTE AUTO--· PHYSM:i\;t DAMAGE COVE.E 
\.,Mer 
i.;a,•.g,a'.)'! t .. -(;.j·HA!r'\ l..AiL.HS; 
MQ­Rli F FO[JIPMFNT ANT) TFMPQ.ARY RlJ..TfTUTF AUTOS r:f SECTIO..,J 1 --CO\/EF.FD AUTOS, tho foliowing is adCt:d. 
It PhyFoir:a' '.l.=nragG cr.veraqn·'s oro•1.id1.c! hy tri. Cov• ecage Form, thar you ha'.'C coverage far: 
Any "m1tn" .11. do nnt .i"Nn whilr. Ll.crl ·,,,.ilr tho por­rniF-sio1 of, It,:; owrier a_c;· a -lFltr,po-r.iry i:;;ub1-.\itll\fl· fot -.­co-..•tl'Cd ·'a.Jic-'' you owr: · t.i.al is cu! of .t NI ce Lt­caiIf-3 ol ijii bi.kriown r!inr;it, !li"!t'iiir:ir.g, ";m:is" ni" tl:Jstructioo. 
BROAD FORM. NAMED INSURED 
SECTION !T. -'JAB
ILIW CO\.'EAAGE -A.1. WHO ·c-·
IS AN 1r\Sl!P.f '.): 1.rc'liisi::)il il:1 amiii:.ded b•; th'J addit:6:-.· of tho !olk,wlrig: 
d. Ariy biJsme'ss eritty rrewly c:cquired or· tonied jy you during, ths policy p£rie:d .mwickd yo:1 cw-i 5C<';'S or mm·.., cr' t'ie· ':)L:;;; ine..-"r, nt=iy fl.OO thn bJsiness e!nt,ty .. is Ml S"epars.tely _,nsul'ed to.·

-8•JRit1Cili;g At,to Coveragq. COV{lfQ11" . Q'li:;tQq_dGd I.le'! to ;:i_ JM.lll:ini•JtTl of 180 day. folltiv.i7{] .wquisi­tron or ·:cr'.Tlah.1 at t.1c:r bus'..1c sg entity. ·cov.e rage· ·
IJ;uifH "ir1is. p((l\/;r;i;n:i . '1 rror(lc :,i (;fl ly 
Il("l 11 ;tlf: f,n{j 
onns policy .erioct t3.KEl ADPITIONAL INSURED 
Si::CTIO"-J JI -. .J.A.31Uri'· Cblfi:Hl1GE. -A.1. WHO 
.s ANc11\JSLHE-O provii:;jn11 jf; Fl_MAfldl'lc1 hy U1.a ;:idd_•tior, 
. 
nt th. tol lOWinl'J' 
e. Arr; por9otl or crga.iwfo'1 tOl' w'1c-n .-cu 3!'e ra­qu,rcd c:y 5.1 "insL.rnd contract'' to·.prnvidc ,asur­
.
;mc. ·. :m .,tlRU'Pd", P.LlbjGCt io: t'lP 1o,lr.wi'1g oodit[cmal pmvisions: 
<1) Th CJ "m.mM r.o·mr:t'' mut'it-r.n ii nfttir.t di.r"ng :he po'l<:'f .erloo' s.r.-\•,·ri 11-the Deda, ·rations, arid 1nust have :ii3cn CXGCulc::I .rior 10 thu ''bodliy lt1jtry. or ;•propert,' dHll·,aqc''. 
{2} fh i.s person c-r orgBllizs.t,oii is 611 •'insure c; '' orly to· t'l. mctnrrt you .rr, ''il'Olc OLW to your origoirlg op:Flr::..tioru; fO'" t'1::\t il1SlJf9d, wi1e,.r lhe v.-ork. b· ,.icrtom-£.d .f.ycu ur .:c-r you, at1d or.I°!-'' to lhP.· P-:.tP.["lt you fll"P. i"IF.lrl: ;i!'lbl. tor ;iri .accLdcnt" cccu.rrrrig whlfr a c_ovorcd ••a.o•· ·i .1:!"ing tl"i\'t:n lly yc-u i::;r-0·11: of ytur tim· ;il·ove:es. 
{3.) Trm. 's rm ·co.·eragr:. rm1:irled·to t'i1s :p!11"i'lnn -or orgs.rnzatio, fc.r "b0d'l1• inju.y" -to· its em­oloya8i;, rior for ->prooa"y <i.rna,g·
i=ib to •Is orooP-rt't-. 
.4) CnveragP-tnr th s pP.rs;on or urg:::inirdtifln s'la I t:e l"'Tlitnl to t'ln mo:wnt of yo Jr ncgli• gcnr:a o,• !au t axordl rig 10 t:-ic M.o!leab:EJ. Dr re•.•. of cornp<1rahvc oc:g1lgcrictn:-r fHlllt. 

{S) l'hlil defense. ot any claim c-r *suit'· i1[1st be 1c11dcrr.ct oy !h-s r:e.on, OT orgini,e:tir:n . 
.eo-; e.t-':)racticablecto· all other irsiz-.lre 
· w:-iic:1· ;,otantialh, .ro.Ac•insLra:nr.e· for SJch -c,a1m ur "!>:U,t". 


lt'ICIJdm cooyrightcd matcrl91 of fnsutaneid ·,Scn1iccs C-ff:cc, 
l'ic., with its pcrtrl ssion. Co.yr.g.'lt.,-.Jns J rar.u:e .Services Oft.ca., Inc.-, 1997 
Er 
(.} TIW c,;r:.crn. prcvid8Q ·'1'1111 001. .am:l 111Q­les.ser of: 
(aj Tnc .covcragu 1:tndi . .::H li11.ts o1 u1ls polk:y; OT 
(b) T--io covatago !ll"'l(l/or lim•ts req:Jiracl 'J"/ tre ""lrni1ireo i:onir. •­
(7} P.. pel'9orr'a or or;;ia ,i ze:ticrta statue M 9:. ·fosured'' ufllie1· -th,s sL1bparsgt!ipt1 d enlis who1 ynur ootirQ.t,or,. ..tor ;t-to.t "i'nsurofi•: nro oornptotcd. 

L.n.dct Pai-s.fJtap:7 A. ct Sect.or.. JI -.JJ\.31Ll:Y CJ'•J, 
ER AGE iMrn f. ii,i i!!tldcd as 10•iOI..Vs: 
YoJr ·'e:n;ilov.tl" w:11.1:i us:ng hl:o owtied "w1:<.:-"., ur !.'I "&Ito" owned tl)i a nicn-,,:x.a ut l"l,s o.-oer r,o.Jsotiold,_ fr-1 yoJr husinl=l.S or ',iOUr pet$00RI at1.a1r-:., ;:,rovirii:;d )IO(J 
Cl:i not ow.1,.:11ra 01 tlc-rrc-w ttia.1, ;,.utc-•. 1.1.B co'.'emgo .-,:xr:rn.. 
ra ,my nlh,"lr
· c:.lc:t;milc? ;.,.1.ir;ir1o.••,c ,:o,1,ita90, 
FE'LI.OW EMPLOYEE COV-ERAGE. 
Excluslon 5. -FELLOW EriJP .. OYEE ot SECTION -11 l ''ABlLJIY OOVl:R/\C',c -s. 1:xcu::sroNS la a'J;s,1de:d :w lhs ad.itc.;1 c;f t:10 1O:10wing: 
rc•,ue.vcr, tt•i.· e:xclu5:ion·dcern ·1u1 u:ipl}' if the· _'1::_0dily i:1j::..11v· resuts lrom the l.111;'>0 Q1 c:. ccver,,,d "autc" y,;;-Cl' u;.m or hire, and provided' toa.t any oo\/erage un.er t'lis prp'ision only app'ios ii 9::,;c:,3ss'. O\'!;l. a1y ot'lcf collect b'e bsura:-ti::c. 

BLANKET: WAIV.[R or SUOROGA TI.Of.I 
We vld\io tnu rlghl of rocovory wr.: rr.a1 hHVv 101· pc.·­mnnte mftd1 .Pr "hoctrly injcirf'' ?lr "':>ro-:,nrty da""'lr\fi'lt' c, b'9t-iQlf tit t"1e pc'f'tlDn. 'Gir org£mi2aro'"Y.! ·addatl a3 ''in1M€as• unoarSection II LlA.a.tUfY CJ'/i::HAG.: -A,1.0. =.iflQ/\IJ t-'OfiV, Nl\.F.1·). l•\-Sl)FI-:) O"'I. A, 1,-c, BV1Nl<P' 110Df110Nf\l. 11,:;SUPL=IJ. 
PHYSICAL DAMAGE 
ADDITlONAL_ TRANS­
PORTATION EXPENSE COVERAGE 
1 ·147 fi,s1 '!;.(')4e,n!':. 1:1.f pa.Faqraoh A.4. of :$i:C11or,.,· 1+1 -PI-IVSICAL-DAM.AGE" GO\'Ff:IAGF. •s ama11rled .is. follow. 
WP-will nav lip tc;i $50 rer d:=:y to R 11e-.:imu.rn of $1,s::;i;: tor tt:i,npc:ra:ty. : ra:1s.mia.ti on oK;icMc .. 1.. urre Cl bit ym '· hf!GadSE:! "1 t;w. to.El. 1!'11::!tt of S. oov.FtrP.ri ''S,Jfr) • of rho pr!vi:rtn p;:iRsongm tyl)i'.1 
f.fRt,OW\L. Effl:QT. CO.RAOE 
A. Sf.:.IQ-:<J iu -Pl-¥SK:!A.;. I ..l'v1A-3E C:OV.fi­/lGE·, A.4. ·C(JVERAGE EXTEtJS.IQNS, is amended by Bddir.g the tOIIC'!Vin_g: 
C:. .ersonal E1feds Gove.rage 
F.r::,J F.ny (PN'lr.rf "'EJto• :hat 's irvD:vnd in a r.il.l'lrl"'-<l "lm,H", \Yn w;1; flFiV I ,r, tc:-$::00 f()t 'terson..;I '3ffects'' tnat <ttre !dst or' di:l:naqed a1:: 3 re,ill't cf tre c:ovorerl ·t:iar.ff , \•l'.h:ilJI 4i:;r.ily;ng a tteci.ti 1;10. 

PHY$':CA. 'JAMA.GE COVE11A!3E is. fllY,£1dcd to add: 
5. Vic. w .. I '.lay 10, tl'lu C)(p)Onso Ol ro1um1r,g a :-stolQn rov,::irP.d "alJto" to yot1. 
AlR.BAG GOVER.AGE 
:iTC.HH ·;:iur;;igmpn 6. -EXCLLSIC·KS ::n 5ECTION TH -PHYSICA:.. DAf..,\GE C::)'/ERAGE, the f0Tlow1.::s added; 
-:-rie GX{;I us un rn lati 1 g· !c mcch un;cal tJma -EI.io,. 1 oot.:s nut ai.,ply to the aclldo1lai d.har.o uf an airl.Jag, 
iiiEW VEHICLE REPLACEMEr:;T COST 
.J,ids11
. Paragra:::in C -u•.rr Of. ltJ$1JFl!'\_'\JCE of Scdion Ill -PHYSICAL .,'\PlAG£ COVEc.,AGE s9c. llm 2-18 arncridcd a$ follows: 
2. An i.djustmer1t.fnr c:lerirfldation,;i.nd pt1ysic.al oon­lillO.:l w11i ::it: .:nat1c .n c:t:cnn1:iing· 3.CtJcJI cash \l.;llo ;n 1h4: n'\JiHlt t.f .1 kJ.'s1 IO.'>S. t:-1n111it:'<"1ir, in .rlP. event oi a total loss to your "new vehrcle" to whlr.1 tt,':rs C:J\'Elr:;ge flpp.. es, a,<; shcw1 11 the 
.1:;:,:nqtio1s; we w1:: pay ai your optic-n .. 
. ­
a. 
Tr;. \'C.filiat::.£ "new 'JCtl C: ." i:;urc.l!iSe ::l(ice you paid 1or your damacied veh cle. 10t in­ci'Jcir•g a·ny lnsJr,nca -U:r warrah!cs ;.:;ur• a:ia.od; 

b. 
H:c purcha:;;,;;: ;:,ice, as ·-,e,;::;otiatod· l::y :.JS, of a 'iOW 11d1 blc of rt.::: satliO mai<Q, modo ut1d ·ecuipment. no1, im::'uding a"Y'/ f:Jn•shings, j'.)l'!rts or ::(]11i ;::rte'lt not insta11eti !:l.'.)t the ,T1a11ufactu.,"er or ma•h.Jlacturer's ooalersn,p. if hn l'lflme mo..• i. n.t a.1.,-eil.-l:b. P:'f the pt1rc.sr.· ::irir,e of '. rt,o-sr $1'Ttii;,t mode' .awi'iub,c; 



c. Tll!i;I rn.rkel.VD.I. Of YQOI' .:,.::"lilgf;:d '(Ql'.liCC! nol i1cludir:g any tumisninqs, pG.r.is Of equips mnnt 
('.li:>t ii:lfl\'..d I::·( tt-tn tian'iifr;.c;t1.r·Pf or 1m.1r\Jfacturer"s at.sr.hi.. 
T"lifl ·::mve+agn-·a·pr,liil:,;· mily fo a: r.-::ivrirc:d .a·.rt1:1" of' l"lc--:'.ulvalO .M::!Mgorr light trtY.:k or modl'um trJr.k t)·pc (?.0.00£1 lbl'l or r-s1'1 grti::I:"$ vebir:1c: wc'\11-it}. nnd do<:. not :.pply tn bflir.ti.Jn or r.nt 'JP c:us,s. OO$ot.atod wltn loa.1s o: ,ca.sos. 
TWO. OR MORE DEDUCTIBLES 
vild.r sFOTiQ.\J 11+ -r·--1vs1t'A,. t>.vft.Gf cov. 
EAli.GE, iJ tvto Of 
IY'IQf'P "ccmpar:iy. pol c es °' tOJo..r• 
a.{)' forms a.p.y to t:re same acclc.."11. the 1o .. ow .. ,g· 
.::ipJ,es lo p.;ir.igr.;ioh a. [)Qdt;c;it1IP.: 
a. 11 rnu 3ppll£:ab,(! l::l.Usl r.1ots ..'.I.Llttl dodliCI• iblP.' is the !'lmall"lr (.or f:11aliP.St) df:!fim .. 1­IIJI! . .:: 11' 'J,LI .'.)(J, Wall/cCt m 
b; If 1hn appli,..Bb·e Busi1e11P. Auto :ierluct-­ltil,. i,:t 11n1 h,? .rn .. ,1;,-..r (r,, f!.tl'.l;JI ;n.1} 
ci,!• cmctaoI0 .t wlll po rcduccd b'i/ tho !;lrnount 
.t
01t' 1h2 r.mall(l'r (r:r r.rnEJtl(lst) trerue1 I"! 11; 
Os' 
.-If ll1u lu. ir'Lll'IJl\.'tlt:l lw.u i.!i .HU'il'::: 8Wt1· nc.s All.r.:. oovora.ov feirrns or :>011c1os ti-€ flY,e.'lor (or srnalfcst) daduct bic vi'I bi= 'i•.'afvcd.. 
F'm the ,p-Jrpc-se of th'a er:dorse'.Tlc:rii 
"'oomµany'' mea-is: 
a. Sate.co lilSurnncc Ci:.Anpe.11·;-o1t.A1il!'.l1ka 
b. A,-na1ican Slates l11Surs.nce Company 
e. General lnsu1s.nc::e Company ol America 
d. A,'h-9,ican· Economy ll'\81,,'rance Comf::a,,y· 
e. F ,rf:tt .rut ,Ona· lnsu farrL'C C-Otn µa. 1)' uf /1.'l.:'flca 
t; A'TK?,if'..Bl1 Steifl'3 f rs.r;iq. ('zyn,J.tiy of Tel'ias 
g, Aw,if'..al'J Sf;;i.t'll'it. .4!1"ed !ni:iii.r.ri.. C:J.:n.any 
h. Sat ecc-l.'l:'Sumn co· .c.:-tn pe.n1· o1 I . .I rrois 
l OAr"ll!.l f'ASE GAP COVERAGE 
.iidu par.affapi\ c -1,Jrii111 01-· ·1,r:.su1tANG1::: ur SE<;: flON 111 -PHY5ICll.1. I )l\:f'l'IAGI: 00\il-llfi.Gi,.;, t1n follm'L·ing ·s add()d: 
4.. f ne inost . w,11 pa:y 1or a lot&. ·:1 osa'' 111 any on.a ''nr.-:id!lnt;' i. .h-:i g•ooi01 nt Mr to11ow•ng, sl;'n'jt:,r,t to.a .LSOO 'Tlaximum ihiit: 
.. i\.:;tml, ;.as11 v:r..o or c-ic da.mug.eci trr 61:ctcn p1opert·t as ol \11e brne d lhe "oss", 1ess an 4r.jt1::;.rttnnr for df)p(c:c'ci.i"n ann 
ph·rt.ii:;a• ·ccn:e:ion; or 
b. .il<"Lrren c:iil trider' t'in 1erms of thn· 1oari' or &OaSo L1at. the clal11c.gcd co\lCrcd ··auto" 
.,s ·s:ib_e,ct to :it t11n: timr-of the: ·'1os-a'\ r-sl\ rtry Of"('l' r.r ..ill uf tho folfcri.•ing .i1ji1rtmm:rtn:. 
{1 J ()1or,:JLJC paymcrt.. and 'fi'l2naia' oo-rlB.ltim, associiiled w.t.1 thoE;e Ottynic
').s :::;.e:-of . ha detµ •Di <t,o 
..!Qf;s". 
(2) fi11!!.rdal peni=. lties irnposP.d , .-idP-r a 
.asc due to blgh. rn . .ea.c. exc.2s­swc uset°' armorrn:a:.1 wc:1inmd tcdr. 
(3) C&1s. 1or c::..:tooood W.;irj:an11ti!l:, (.;w. dit Ue t<1,:;tm=t[ICI'\ l-tea11h, Ar.cident '.r• D'!;:.abiliry hsursnr.e:: purc.haRod iruil't; tm fntla m lm1s.i. 
(4) Ttansfor er ro::Ovcr ba:Snces f-t.::im ;Jrq.vlOU$ Ic-ans or lo ascs. 
(.) Final pqvme-:1t a1.,1. u..er a .i:,a11oon _utin ., 
{8} f' 111 .fol It. r-t:1r.r 1u J.flI cir ·.r· y J:-t.-repairei:I C,a..apc that occuricd Jl'iff to tns ·'tota. loss"· cf 
s cave red "autr.". 
.7) Socutiftf ct0pos".s net refu"'ldod b'{ e m11'or. 
{B} A.11 rcfur.tJs µa.y-e!J'e er :1aid tc y.ou as a res..ilt oi tie saJ,y termins.lion :rt a !eesc agreeirncrtr or my war­ranty or c,itortdod SOP"J1ee· agroo­·neat o'l a. crn.·si rt!d ''a:ut,.'I''. 
(i) A:iy urnct.1:it wµro'sa:1Ul'1g :wws. 
( 1t'.l-) _oon o:· leru:;c ttJ rm inat o, fuc.s 
Gt.ASS REPAIR -WAIVER 9F DEDVCW.e 
v'lclg,_ oar;igr;iph D. -l>f-0. rl!'l.t E crl 8!-CtrtQa..J +II -PHYSICM. DAr.-.GF COVF.RAGE. the foHP'f,.ring·is added: 
Nn r:ie.dJ:r:1i::ile acm!iE!f> 1o fll R.SS di;: m.e if tha (]I ;:iss; .is 1epc:lred tatMr-i."lan·r.;.i,ac.:ed. 
A.tJ1ENDED DUTIE. IN THJ=, EVENT OF ACCI­DENT, CLAlW, SUIT OR LOSS 
The rcQu1rcmont In L:OSS ·COtJDITIOtJ 2.a. ­'.):.JTIF,S IN Tr: :Vf..t\"T OF I\CCl[)fNL Cl A1r/, S!Jff Ort _·oss -cf Sl:CTIOJ'l.: IV -Bl:JS1r,,;ESS AUTO' CONOITIONS' ihal Yoll !'llLISl riotiry· us o1 an 


.c:<li;inr a.p:lG'S c11Y w1on t:10 ..Gtdcnr is-.Kr.ic-w:1 fo: 
(1 J Y Ol:I, f you ar"c at1 indiVid ua f;_ 
(2) 
A pa Tfrie•, if icr. J··fl.re !i ¢art"rie rn'ii p: nr 

(3) 
Aa exsctn;v"' o::ir.er m insurs,'.11'.P.·rriariager. i{ you: are a cmporatim _ 



Li NI NTENTIONAL FA.lW,RE TO DISCLOSE 
. . . 
./\ZAR.OS 
..r
·
SECTION [V -BL:SJNESS. Al,."TO CCNl:,:T.o.s i3.2; Is .manducl bV t.io acldlUun o/ lhc ful"iowlng: 
It vo;i u::-.::itent:tina.1'.V fail fo di.c o.i:l any .a.z:a.fd::; cx:­ishnG-at tns inception rate oi yc-ur policy; we ¼"iii not d::: ny r.ovr. r,1.oe: u1 dr::r th,'" Criv._rari" fo rrn ;:ir.r;E1 u !';e of s·Jch f3:lu.c. .ov1over, this ;)rovisic-n de-es r,ct a:lfoct OJf fQhl to-c.oiloGt hlldHlunai prumlum m oxcrdsu cl:.lr right er Gflnr:r.l•at:cn ;Jf. ncm-rr.newfl'. 
kl.RED AUTO -LIMll"ED WORLD WIDE=. t::oVF:Jt0 AGE 
L.ndcr ScctiM IV . BJsinc::;s Co'id,nuM, Pa.'y"g{'<'..i.?i'l 8.7.b',6(1r) i!l rop.Md:by t"lo M:i•OW.tig: 
{1) Tt-,e ·•.=ict.i<lar,I" or" "'o".. r.,:;.11lh, frn--n th. J!::A of a.,· ·.1r1to . ht. to,
-·3C days er less: 
RESULTAr,.tT P.'IENTAL A.CUJSH COVE.AGE 
.C r!Of\l V. -Clf-.=l,'<,IJ IONS -C. is:reol.r.ert oy ihP, fnlloW.illff 
"h!ocill',' lt•l!,I.Y" tn8:0./la ·oc-.dy -n.Ul)I s1cknci:;s c-r o i,:­m*n s1J1.:fRmcrl ny si r,mson 1nrJ11C1in!J. mcrli:11 ang, n.h or dnsih reP.LJlt"lg 1mm a1y·of ihe!lfl.. 
1-tl.EO ·AUTO PHYSICAL [)AMAGE COVERAGE 
If !"II rff! M.num:r ,1 rn :-:n\lr. rM ·al, TM. rm I In h ;:1ry r.r.,v. erage and it Cc:mprehensive, Specifted' Causes orf L,::iss ut Cc-U"slon Ce-'\'G1ra9t.S mo ;iro,,lcJcd undu. m:. CGvura. Fur:n for any "a.do. '!"OU ovm. thm1 tho Phy{,lltal iJc1m.gc Cm,·c:n:igocs prCWldcd .re extended ta ·•mr.c-;,;• you h:rn or l.}orro\",'. 
1 .E most. we WI. pay tor 1o.ss to an¥ .hired "auto. is $SC,.C-0 tir Ar.tfral Ca.."lh "f.-=.IL10· or Cor.t rit fi.:;,af r; 'fihic.tiver :. s.I05\! mfr.us a: dcdJcti.II:. The cc­tl:J(,-t.::i,c wl"il· uo c4ua, to 1. la.gt.:Sl duct.Jctiolc a.p-11. cahil'l •,o o:.ny o-ri•r:in<' "e:·.rto. ot t'lr: ;:,rivate pa._.nr,(lr <ir"ligh\ b•Jck type icrlra'.: ewe.rage. w;rcd Auld Pt")'­· 
s,cal Carnage cowragc ls,c.c. OV-O. .)'-Ot/\N CO.· l<'ditln irtff\.l''.,?n(;l"1. $11njnct to 1hc .:l.f.l'm I rnlt, .cda.!i'.:IICl m1. GXQcss prnv.8:c-:is, we· ·v..I. provtde cover.e equa1 to loo l::roadest covefage ·app:icab1etc firj•(4ri\li"lred ''fluto. yr;.1i" r'.•V',fl 
.RED AUTO PtlYSICAL DAMAGE: COVERAGE ­LOSS or USE 
SEGTlGN IU -PnYSICAL 01\[,.ltt\GE A.4.b-fHm does 1ot aprly, 
Sub;ect to a maxi.nJm of :i1 .OXi per a:x:idenf we wil,
-
f;O<,'l')f ;QrG of U.<1 .t ii hirqd "rwto.· it" .rf().ll.S fr.'Tl sn 3epidont. you aro loga1 1i I .::l1o ;r1d the l<l.eeer in­curs·,in ...cH1al f .. 1,11:ic,a •. o.. 
RENT.AL REIMBURSEtlENT COVERAGE 
A. We ·-1'1.11 ...:.-for rorifo.l "rcirn::iuri.t:in;:::-.t 6xpcrn1c. lncLJrrvd ov vot:1 tor-the rnnla of c.r1 "Mlo'' i,()­ca'JS€ of a c::r:cr-cd .1C6s" t::r a oo·,cmc.1. .m.n:c-''. r·a1m()nt arplim. :'1 arlrlifu'l to. f-!r:. ot1nr11•isn ap• plicabie arr,OJnt at eaCh coverage ),'O,J have 0.1 a c:ovcrr.d ai=.,1.0". \IQ ne:dLIr.tih_ln:,:; ar pl:° 1c th·. 00111cr.flc. 
B. We w II bay anly fr::r thr::so a.pan·ses, :1ncjJ"cd during tne policy o·eriod oeg11nin. 24 nours after 1lie .101:,s . ·a:i<l crnf ng. ru ya id'e:s'.:: or t•i. .c-'it-)' 's cx;,:iatiori, ;,vith t. :esser of 1ha fcllm•ri11gr:iurti.or 
·rof days: 
1. rhe number ol days reasonably required· to moa'r ot rcr;lace t'lr:· c:ovnmc1 .i'l.,rtr."r. It .,oss;• [;S c.us.od .·-t.1, frus :1u11ber 01 di:i'j,. li',i added to tht, n .. untl'Gr DI Uay'3 !( l.al(cS 19 Ior:.e t,r. r:O'\ler.c-t ":'l.JJl.n" fl n r1 Tetirrn it tc;i yeu, 
2. '30 d,:i%, 
C. Our r.1?irllG1t :!3 1:,n tcd io t.c-lesre·, of t1e· fol­lowing a·moJnt.s: 
1. 
Nco:Jssary ljnd adi,;1c1I c;.;ponscs incurred. 

2. 
-$. per dti}.­


D. This covc:ragc doc·s not: ·ap:p y w_hifc tt',crc arc spa re :::ir r::!sor..·e "aJto"s. . e.va"i.a;JI (] to \fOU tor your opcr 21tiO("IS:. 
C. n -.lessm re-sc Its from t "le tota: t""lctt of "!I cove red "e":.Jto" oi t"'ie pri•1uto ?ri8'Sc:n·gor typai, wc:\viH '?UY uridEr tnis wve,·59.e o,,,y tns.t 6JTlount of you·r ra.ta.l raim\:ll.!.r.lC'Tie'lt CX.On':108 W'\lch 'S not lll­roS.c.1'y pmvklod 1c, u.dc c tho PHYSIC/\. OMA­AGE COVE.AAGI::. Covarage E::tmnsion. 
·rt-• .l:()vl;) 1kii:.: · i.JI ;;i:ii; y lu q ·cd.·:.:rt:t.f ",tuli;'." 11 1r-l '1:, de:scribod c:,r .desiqr1ated as-a cov.red ·'ai.;to. 011 
F. The Rc.r:n.a, Fo1h1burscrncti Co-.·urngc d1;.crflioo 

R.a:-it.:;.I .RL,,:rri:,.urscrt€:1t Oov.oragc Form CA 99 2$. 
AUDI01 VISUAL AND DATA ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT COVERAGE· 
A. Ct'Wf!l"l'lge! 
1. We will ·:12v with msrcci TO i'il" [':(]\fl') ro<:I "RI rrnw 
ror ·'less" ro at1y t·cctrun·c cqut.rr,o·t t·1ut ·
t.cJ; \/e.s r,, ir.m1..i;:;.nirs 211,!lln: 11;..li.il .1. f!;:I. 
.!slgnals .d that i. not dJsign:. SQicly . tor tho reprooucr·o-1 or .cund. T>-il. ·t.o·t<!r;'i{]e App·1es 

ur.1:V ir U.iu uq11:;;.riut11 i$ ..ttr!l;inm..r, ::1:itallfi. in foe COW.led ''auto" al the time ot tti.e "'ld13s!'" c.-t'1. .qLf?cnor¢ is rqmcvatlt_ficrr. a 
oo·JEJir..f anit -wliic'l i::i ·;:,cr.riancmtly :ista.ll.d in: tne covered ·'Gb.Jto" at 1he time. ot the "lo.s•, 0.nc: suctl eq:Jipmcnt is d,es·grcd to be enlefy" cpcr.atad t:/ L1aa of tho j)C:\'i•e· 1rcm thff "a.Jto's'' elect,ical sya\e"m; inm upon the eo-1crod .mri''. 
2; Wr: w·II ony \!\'Ith rn::JX)ci .n r! r:ovcm:n "c·.rto" fc.r "loe:$" b -any, accoseorioo .d with. too· c.Jr..x:;1ruriic (.;Cpiirr.e;rt oosc,fat;,ci In µ"eiri:.l.W.h 
A.1!.!.,i°QQVe 
f-1.WJgv.r. r'li. fli:xm not inr.fL1d. t.o., 
rer.ofrls or di.rs. 
3. tf Audio, Visuf.J and :Jata Ef,:ictr.cmic Equip­ment CDve1ag.· Jorm :;A B9 6::> or CA 9S g.: Is .am.-ictiuO to lh1S po,lct, thotl the AuOIO, \/,­J'lUltl .nd Data Hinmnic fquipment" CMP.r­r,.ge r:fnRr.rihed above dons not ap;:,ly. 
8. Exclusk,ns 
'r1_1.; Ol<..,us;4?ns iilat uppiy tu p,._;y51_CA.L DAM­,'\GE C.VEP/\G-=,. C)(COO! 1-0r H;(j <:Jl!(C'\J.lor,: yo-a!­ing .o. Aud•o. Visu;;.I .riri 11;:;iti::.. fJm-;tro-,ir. 
. Equi IJliiEl 11, alM lp µ1.: t-0 f:1I s ,00\/e ragG. , ti" .dj,. t!rm, .I-re rnllow.i'l!} <'l)(Cll,/;;lc:-r,e; ;i!Qoly. 
·wo wl,, llut pay tor o,tt.c-r e.f:y c!,u£ttorilc ou,u,.­mcl'lt or at.'l'.:cssorics · usod with s.ic ll <l !octroitic 
.aql.llt,Jrr:£."'lt tt:, .. t Is. 
'1. f\E:Cm,sc1.ty fot i.10 nor:r:ial .o.eru.tloti of tho r'.0\fP.rP.(1 ..iil•Jfl" 10< ttie rr,Qr1110<lllQ nl UJP. mv. mn: "rlnrn•s. Of'l<'J' Rtin{l 11}mt0,m,; nr. 
2. !:loti1: 
a an intcgra, oart of the sm,o urn! ncHJS1ng ehy scii:i:,d rop.dudng ntjulprne'lt r.t­Bignrn:l 5ololy fer t:w wµrc·clJc;ti;::m of sourt:1 II the sourt:I roproduc1ray !;Jq,li;irnunl j.;: ;,111 'Tl,;l,I ICJll[iy' irn1[-.1".u ill tr:e Govcrcd ·a.ut;;i"'; am:! 
b, per'T'.l8:icntf>;. lrima!.d in 
opcnin::i of tho dash °' 
cc.msol<.1 norma,ly u&Cld .'I t:io :nanufuciurcr ..crttm il'.lBlallcl!:O:i Of a radio. 
c. limit of In• u ranc. 
Wi1h rcsp,.:n:t to this coocragc, the: LIMIT Of IN­
SL.1-i.A..\)Ct. provision ol _.Jff'l'SIGAL l)ll.W..AGI:: 

COVERA:Gf .is renl.r.ad .i:ry t:,e fO:lmliir'ig· 
1. Tt;n rn.m,'f 'J.'() v.-11; p:,iv r!.• •IcH-1." tn· ;J11.!'1;,-,, vi. sua or -dat;;. etectmriic equiprnenl and ·any­ar:c:eFir.onos user i\''t'l 1h r. nqJ'o·ncrt ai a mauil l'...1 arry ona .a.:c,tQt;r ;S' t::ie 1.ui:.sor·o:: 
a, Thi;! a\.,luO.: Ui$l:1 :vtll ut ul· (l:11:i U.·ntj.yc;d or stolen property c:s of tbe time of. the "!t.s"; ::n 
b, rhe r.ost ot rep_Riring or Ft.p'ac'•!l: the do.ma:.od or stolen .rope·rw W:t:-i o-t;1or µro.o,1y o1 lil<:c klnct and qu<ilil'f. 
c. $',);,OC: 
2. An· adjJstmerit lor depreciation arid physica. ccn;;J".lon will .o, ma.de in oetgrr:nl ,Ing aqtµal oae:h value,at tl'l(: ti mo-o1 trta ·4'Qse.. 
·;t. " a !'Q1psit or rople.c-J'Mrt roeulf:e irt t!o•tor 
lhaJ. ,lr<e "'fnd or quulity, we .w,I, n:J.r pay 1ot 100 atf)OL!i)t oJ U1i=J OAtlQrMQ'JI. 
C. Deductible 
1. If "'cs." t,) t•,c a:Jcl!c-, ·,1.isual ::ir d.:lia a'ec· 1ron.ic equ r-,TJe:rt or acccs11Cri.s used ·<ll''fh 4his equipment: is lne result ofa, ·'lo&." to the 
cc:vared'. "a:Jt09 under t"'lc 3:.isines::: A..rtc­
. "co.veraga Fmrr•. CQmpranert$iVC t.:r Co'li­s,on CCNenige, then for eac1 oova,ed ".auto'' 
01::r otiiig!rtlo"I to pt1)' for, repeilr, tetu•n or ra­plsco d:i:1,:;igod or stJ'O'lJ.mperty wit bo-ro·­dr...c:d a; the sppl.cab.e dadud olc shcw.1 in ioo Derc:a<itio.. A;. Co-np,e".'IAnsi\143 Cov:. 
or;1ge di:idur:tiol8 sho.wn ;,.. t'10 Dec•.-•atifFlS docs not ar;ply to '\6ss •. to aJd o, v.sJe.l or d.tr.t a,(lctrO.<M:. t:x;J.Jli.;rl,O"ll. .aJ.od by 1im or lightning. 
2. If . OSS'' to the· ru.JdO,. Visua! 
· ot data ,;:llOt:­lruril,; et;u.p.i'ient ct u.cccssur,i:ll:I, Jscd W.lh 1111s. .QiJIOmAtlt 1s trr. t._st,. ul ,1, "lo.." 1.-:i tt.e ·r.mmrnd "Amo• 1mo.r IM Rusin. ,L\._110 CovfYra'gu ror1i'B 5psc111ca Cuusc.;s er loss Coverage, thcri for cEtch m,crea "6l1Jo"· eur ot:iigat1on 10 pay tor. ropair, rotum or roE>lacc dGJn.gert 
or :=.tc,lon r.roperty '/'lillJ 
be. rC!c1ucod :.,•;• ii ..CJ d.uucl t.;"t:. 
.·
3_ If .:oss'' occu:s sci€1y to 1he auC:ic-. ·l.s:.ia or data e1e::::tron;c-equ i:mem 0< accessories ;.isd v,it'"i th's cq:.ii;:irno11t, t"'lt1 fc.r s.ch r:;.':J"t• er!ld "aulc.• our obliqat'or. tci 


Er 




