AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE CITY OF EL CAJON AND
Home Start, Inc.
THIS AGREEMENT is made and entered into thiso2􀃉M day of 􀃊---' 2020, by and
between the CITY OF EL CAJON, a charter city and municipal corporation, hereinaf referred to as "City," and
Home Start, Inc., a nonprofit organization under the laws of the State of California, hereinafter referred to as
"Subrecipient";
WHEREAS, there exists a need within the City of El Cajon to provide a variety of services, including
housing, recreational, educational, and child care services and developmental programs [Note: We should
probably expand this list of examples to reflect the COVID-19 grant uses]; and
WHEREAS, the Subrecipient has expressed a desire and has the expertise and experience to operate
the program entitled "Motel Voucher Program" in El Cajon; and
WHEREAS, the City has entered into a contract with the United States of America through its Department
of Housing and Urban Development, hereinafter called HUD, to execute the City's Community Development Block
Grant, hereinafter called CDBG, program under the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as
amended, hereinafter called the "Act"; and
WHEREAS, the City anticipates receiving one-time Cares Act Community Development Block Grant
("CDBG-CV") entitlement grant funds from HUD for FY 2019-20 in the amount of $802,656, which is intended to
be used to prevent, prepare for, and respond to the impacts of the coronavirus on residents through efforts such
as the Motel Voucher Program.
1.
2.
NOW, THEREFORE, IT IS HEREBY MUTUALLY AGREED by and between the parties hereto as follows:
City Review:
The City reserves the right to review and approve actions and decisions taken by the Subrecipient with
respect to the operation of the Motel Voucher Program for compliance with all applicable regulations.
Subrecipient Status:
The City recognizes the Subrecipient as an independent nonprofit organization and agrees to cooperate
in protecting its image as a politically neutral organization.
3. Service Area:
The Service area is City-wide in the City of El Cajon.
4. Scope of Services:
The Subrecipient shall perform all services described in the project description and. Scope of Work and
Budget set forth as Exhibit "A" to this Agreement, a copy of which is attached hereto and incorporated
herein by this reference.
5. Time of Performance:
6.
7.
Said services of the Subrecipient are to commence no sooner than May 13, 2020 and shall be completed
no later than June 30, 2021.
Compensation and Method of Payment:
The City shall reimburse the Subrecipient for allowable costs incurred under the scope of the Agreement
and applicable Federal regulations, which have not been paid for or reimbursed in any other manner by
any other Agency or private source of funding. The total of all reimbursements shall not exceed
Forty Five Thousand Dollars and no/100s dollars ($45,000).
Compliance with Laws and Assurances:
The Subrecipient hereby assures and certifies that it has complied with and will continue to comply with
the Housing and Community Development Act of 197 4, hereinafter called the Act, and all current and
future applicable federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, regulations, policies, guidelines, and
requirements as they relate to acceptance and use of Federal funds for this federally assisted program.
This Agreement is subject to all such laws, ordinances, regulations, policies, guidelines, and requirements
including without limitation, the Act, Title 2, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 200; Title 24, Code of
Federal Regulations, Part 570; Title 29 Code of Federal Regulations, Parts 3 and 5; Title 24 Code of
Federal Regulations Part 70 and Public Law 87-581.
1
8. Records Retention:
9.
10.
The Subrecipient shall maintain and retain all financial records, supporting documents, statistical records
and all other records pertaining to the use of the funds provided under this Agreement for a period of four
(4) years at a minimum, and in the event of litigation, claim or audit, the records shall be retained until all
litigation, claims, and audit findings involving the records have been fully resolved. Records for nonexpendable
property acquired with Federal funds provided under this Agreement shall be retained for four
(4) years after the final disposition of such property.
Monitoring:
The City will conduct periodic program monitoring reviews. These reviews will focus on the extent to which
the planned program has been implemented, measurable goals achieved, effectiveness of program
management, and impact of the program. Authorized representatives of the City and HUD shall have the
right of access to all activities and facilities operated by the Subrecipient under this Agreement. Facilities
include all files, records, and other documents related to the performance of this Agreement. Activities
include attendance at staff, board of directors, advisory committee, and advisory board meetings and
inspection by City and HUD representatives, and to ensure that its employees and board members furnish
such information, as in the judgment of City and HUD representatives, may be relevant to the question of
compliance with contractual conditions and HUD directives, or the effectiveness, legality and
achievements of the program.
Program Reporting:
The Subrecipient agrees to prepare and submit financial, program progress, evaluations, and other
reports as required by HUD or the City. The Subrecipient shall maintain such program, property,
personnel, financial and other records and accounts as are considered necessary by HUD or the City to
assure proper accounting for all Contract funds. Sub-recipient shall submit all financial requirements in
Exhibit "B" (Request for Payment forms). All of the Subrecipient's records, with the exception of
confidential client information, shall be made available to representatives of the City and the appropriate
Federal agencies. The Subrecipient is required to submit data necessary to complete the Annual
Subrecipient Performance Report and other federal documents in accordance with HUD regulations and
in the format and at the time designated by the City. Subrecipient shall submit a Periodic Performance
Report (Exhibit "C") for the reporting period (may be either monthly or quarterly, as agreed to with the
City at time of contract execution) by the 10th day of the month following the reporting period. The reports
shall include the following information:
A. Number of individual clients served (individual client may be a person or a household)
B. Race of clients served
C. Ethnicity of clients served (Hispanic, yes or no - a person may be of any race and be Hispanic)
D. Number of disabled clients served (as defined by the Social Security Administrative Guidelines)
E. Whether or not the head of the household is female
F. Number of clients who are low income (per HUD guidelines)
G. Whether or not the client is an El Cajon resident.
H. Number of new clients assisted.
In addition, a brief narrative must accompany the report (Exhibit "C-2"). The narrative should include
(but is not limited to) the following:
A. Outreach methods used;
B. Number and disposition of complaints received; and
C. Progress made toward goals as evidenced in Exhibit "A", or an explanation of lack thereof.
D. Any other accomplishments or problems/concerns the Agency wishes to report.
2
11. Accounting:
The Subrecipient must establish and maintain on a current basis, an adequate accrual and accounting
system in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and standards. The City, the Federal
Grantor Agency, the Comptroller General of the United States, or any of their duly-authorized
representatives, shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of the Subrecipient
which directly pertain to the above project for the purpose of audit, examination, excerpts and
transcriptions.
12. Audits:
The Subrecipient is required to arrange for an independent financial and compliance audit annually for
each fiscal year Federal funds are received under this contract. Audits must be in compliance with 2 CFR
Part 200, Subpart F. (Exhibit "F"). An audit may be conducted by Federal, State, or local funding source
agencies as part of the City's audit responsibilities. The Subrecipient shall forward a copy of the
independent audit to the City for review within thirty (30) days of its completion. Within thirty (30)
days of the submittal of said audit report, the Subrecipient shall provide a written response to all conditions
or findings reported in said audit report. The response must examine each condition or finding and explain
a proposed resolution, including a schedule for correcting any deficiency. All correction actions related to
conditions or findings shall take place within six (6) months after receipt of the audit report.
The City's authorized representatives shall at all times, have access for the purpose of audit or inspection,
to any and all books, documents, papers, records, property and premises of the Subrecipient.
Subrecipient staff will cooperate fully with authorized auditors when they conduct audits and examinations
of the Subrecipient's program. If indications of misappropriation or misapplication of the funds of this
Agreement cause the City to require a special audit, the cost of the audit will be encumbered and deducted
from the Subrecipient's CDBG award. Should the special audit confirm misappropriation or misapplication
of funds, the Subrecipient shall reimburse the City the amount of the misapplication or misappropriation.
In the event the City uses the judicial system to recover misappropriated or misapplied funds, the
Subrecipient shall reimburse the City for legal fees and court costs in addition to awards.
13. Beneficiary Qualification:
The Subrecipient agrees to guarantee that at least fifty-one percent (51 %) of the beneficiaries of the
program identified in Exhibit "A," Scope of Work and Budget, are low and moderate income persons or
households. Under the CDBG regulations, the following clienteles are presumed to be low and moderate
income persons and can qualify for service regardless of income: abused children, elderly persons,
battered spouses, homeless persons, disabled persons, illiterate persons, and migrant farm workers.
Beneficiaries qualifying on the basis of income shall have an annual income equal to or less than the
current applicable Income Limits schedule published by HUD for the San Diego MSA, which defines the
maximum income for low and moderate income households. The Subrecipient is responsible for obtaining
the current applicable HUD Income Limits schedule for each year of the Agreement term identified in
Paragraph 6, Time of Performance. The Subrecipient shall retain these forms for three (3) years after
conclusion of the Agreement.
14. Assignment:
This Agreement is not assignable by the Subrecipient without the express prior written consent of the City
Council. Consent shall be given at the sole discretion of the City Council. Any attempt by the Subrecipient
to assign any performance of the terms of this Agreement shall be null and void and shall constitute a
material breach of this Agreement upon which the City may, among other remedies, and without limitation,
cancel, terminate, or suspend this Agreement.
15. Termination and Termination Costs:
This Agreement may be terminated in whole or in part at any time by either party upon giving thirty (30)
days written notice to the other party. Agreement must be reached by both parties as to reasons and
conditions for termination in compliance with the provisions of Title 2 Code of Federal Regulations Part
200. The City Manager is hereby empowered to give said notice subject to ratification by the City Council.
The City may immediately terminate this Agreement upon the termination, suspension, discontinuation,
or substantial reduction in CDBG funding for the Contract activity or if for any reason the timely completion
of the work under this Agreement is rendered improbable, infeasible, or impossible. If the Subrecipient
materially fails to comply with any term of this Agreement, the City may take one of more of the actions
provided under 2 CFR Part 200, which includes temporarily withholding cash, disallowing, noncompliance
3
16.
costs, wholly or partially terminating the award, withholding future awards, and other remedies that are
legally available. In such event, the Subrecipient shall be compensated for all services rendered and all
necessarily incurred costs performed in good faith in accordance with the terms of this Agreement that
have been previously reimbursed, to the date of said termination to the extent that CDBG funds are
available from HUD.
Program Income:
A. Program income defined as that money generated from the CDBG funds received herein, and
shall be retained by the Subrecipient.
B. The Subrecipient shall utilize the program income in accordance with Exhibit "A" and all
provisions of this Agreement shall apply to the disposition of program income.
C. Disposition of program income shall be done in accordance with Paragraph 18 of this Agreement.
17. Reversion of Assets:
18.
Upon the expiration or termination of this Agreement, for any reason whatsoever, the Subrecipient shall
forthwith transfer to the City, any CDBG funds on hand at the time of such expiration or termination and
any accounts receivable attributable to the use of CDBG funds including without limitation, program
income. Further, any real property under the control of the Subrecipient that was acquired or improved in
whole or in part with CDBG funds in excess of $25,000 shall be: (a) used to meet one of the national
objectives set forth in Title 24 CFR 570.208, or any successor statute, until five (5) years after the
expiration or termination of the Agreement, or for such longer period of time as determined to be
appropriate by the City at its sole discretion; or (b) disposed of in a manner that results in the City's being
reimbursed in the amount of the current fair market value of real property less any portion of the value
attributable to expenditures of non-CDBG funds for acquisition of, or improvement to such real property.
Independent Contractor:
The parties hereto in the performance of this Agreement will be acting in an independent capacity and not
as agents, employees, partners, joint venturers, or associates of one another. The employees or agents
of one party shall not be deemed or construed to be the agent or employees of the other party for any
purpose whatsoever.
19. Insurance:
20.
The Subrecipient shall neither commence work under this Agreement until it has obtained all insurance
required hereunder in a company or companies acceptable to the City nor shall the Subrecipient allow
any subcontractor to commence work on a subcontract until all insurance required of the subcontractor
has been obtained.
The Subrecipient shall agree to provide an acceptable certificate of insurance and endorsements
evidencing the coverage as specified in El Cajon City Council Policy D-3, Insurance Requirements, which
is attached hereto as Exhibit "D" and made a part of this Agreement. All insurance policies shall be
subject to approval by CITY as to form and content.
Subrecipient shall furnish properly executed certificates of insurance to CITY prior to commencement of
services under this Agreement. Such certificate shall:
A. Clearly evidence all coverages required above, including specific evidence of a separate
endorsement naming CITY and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and employees
as additionally insureds;
B. Indicate whether coverage provided is on claims-made or occurrence basis;
C. Provide that such insurance shall not be materially changed, terminated, or allowed to expire
except on thirty (30) days prior written notice, via first class mail to CITY; and
D. Subrecipient agrees to provide CITY with copies of all required policies upon request.
Subrecipient shall also maintain Worker's Compensation Insurance (Exhibit "G") with statutory limits,
and employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than $2,000,000 per accident.
No Benefit to Arise to Local Employee:
No member, officer, or employee of the City, or its designees or agents, no member of the governing body
of the City, and no other public official who exercises any functions or responsibilities with respect to the
4
program during his or her tenure or for one year thereafter, shall have any interest, direct or indirect, in
this Agreement or in any contract or subcontract, or the proceeds thereof, for work to be performed in
connection with the program assisted under this Agreement.
2 1. Certification Regarding Lobbying:
The Subrecipient certifies to the best of their knowledge and belief, that:
A. No Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid, by or on behalf of the undersigned,
to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any agency, a
Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress in connection with the awarding of any
Federal contract, the making of any cooperative agreement, and the extension, continuation,
renewal, amendment, or modification of any Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative
agreement.
B. If any funds other than Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid to any person
for influencing or attempting to influence any officer or employee of any agency, a Member of
Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or any employee of a Member of Congress in
connection with this Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement, the undersigned
shall complete and submit Standard Form-LLL, "Disclosure Form to Report Lobbying.'' in
accordance with its instructions.
C. The Subrecipient shall require that the language of this certification be included in the award
documents for all sub-awards at all tiers (including subcontractors, sub-grantees, and contracts
under grants, loans, and cooperative agreements), and that all Subrecipients shall certify and
disclose accordingly.
22. Conflict of Interest:
A. Subrecipient covenants that neither it, nor any officer or principal of its firm, has or shall acquire
any interest, directly or indirectly, which would conflict in any manner with the interests of City or
which would in any way hinder Subrecipient's performance of services under this Agreement
Subrecipient further covenants that in the performance of this Agreement, no person having any
such interest shall be employed by it as an officer, employee, agent or subcontractor without the
express written consent of the City Manager. Subrecipient agrees to at all times avoid conflicts of
interest or the appearance of any conflicts of interest with the interests of City in the performance
of this Agreement (also see Exhibit "E").
B. City understands and acknowledges that Subrecipient is, as of the date of execution of this
Agreement, independently involved in the performance of non-related services for other
governmental agencies and private parties. Subrecipient is unaware of any stated position of City
relative to such projects. Any future position of City on such projects shall not be considered a
conflict of interest for purposes of this section.
23. Use of Funds for Entertainment or Gifts:
The Subrecipient certifies and agrees that it will not use funds provided through this Agreement to pay for
entertainment or gifts.
24. Joint Funding:
25.
For programs in which there are sources of funds in addition to CDBG funds, the Subrecipient shall
provide proof of such funding. The City shall not pay for any services provided by the Subrecipient which
are funded by other sources. All restrictions and/or requirements provided in this Agreement relative to
accounting, budgeting, and reporting applies to the total program regardless of funding sources.
Changes in Grant Allocation:
The City reserves the right to reduce the grant allocation when the City's fiscal monitoring indicates that
the Subrecipient's rate of expenditure will result in unspent funds at the end of the program year. Changes
in the grant allocation will be done after consultation with the Subrecipient and approval by the City
Council. Such changes shall be incorporated into this Agreement by written amendments.
26. Fiscal Limitations:
The United States of America through HUD may in the future place programmatic or fiscal limitation(s) on
CDBG funds not presently anticipated. Accordingly, the City reserves the right to revise this Agreement
in order to comply with actions affecting HUD program funding. In the event of funding reduction, the City
5
may reduce the budget of the Agreement as a whole or as to cost category, and may at its sole discretion,
limit the Subrecipient's authority to commit and spend funds, and may restrict the Subrecipient's use of
both its uncommitted and unspent funds. Where HUD had directed or requested the City to implement a
reduction in funding, with respect to funding for this Agreement, the City Manager or his/her designee
may act for the City in implementing and effecting such a reduction in revising the Agreement for such
purpose. The City Manager or his/her designee may act for the City in suspending the operation of the
Agreement for up to sixty (60) days, upon three (3) days written notice to the Subrecipient of his/her
intention to so act. In no event, however, shall any revision made by the City effect expenditures and
legally binding commitments made by the Subrecipient before it received notice of such revision, provided
that such amounts have been committed in good faith and are otherwise allowable and that such
commitments are consistent with HUD cash withdrawal guidelines.
27. Purchase and Invoice Deadlines:
28.
29.
Purchase of equipment or property must be completed before the last three (3) months of the initial
performance period and all equipment bills are to be paid before the last two (2) months of this period. No
expendable or non-expendable property or equipment is to be purchased during the final three (3) months
of the initial performance period unless approved by the City in writing. Invoices for all obligations incurred
under this Agreement must be submitted to the Redevelopment and Housing Department within sixty (60)
days after the initial performance period termination date or they may not be honored. Exceptions to the
preceding limitations require prior written approval by the City.
Invoices will not be honored unless and until periodic reports are current.
Non-expendable Property:
A record shall be maintained by the Subrecipient for each item of non-expendable property acquired with
CDBG funds. This record shall be provided to the City as well as· being available for inspection and audit
by the City upon reasonable notice. Non-expendable property means tangible personal property having
a useful life of more than one (1) year and an acquisition cost of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more
per unit. The Subrecipient shall not purchase or agree to purchase non-expendable property without the
prior written approval of the City. Upon completion or early termination of this Agreement, the City reserves
the right to determine the final disposition of said non-expendable property acquired for this program and
CDBG funds in compliance with applicable laws and regulations. Disposition may include, but is not limited
to, the City taking possession of said non-expendable property.
Expendable Personal Property:
Expendable personal property refers to all tangible personal property other than non-expendable personal
property. The Subrecipient shall not purchase or agree to purchase expendable personal property with a
unit value of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more per unit without the prior written approval of the
City.
30. Purchase or Lease of Non-Expendable Property or Equipment:
The Subrecipient shall obtain three documented bids prior to purchasing or leasing any non-expendable
personal property or equipment over one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in unit value. The Subrecipient
shall purchase or lease from the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. This inventory shall be
provided to the City as well as being available for inspection and audit upon reasonable notice at the
request of the City.
31. Travel and Conference Restrictions:
The Subrecipient certifies and agrees that travel and conference expenses will not be paid for by funds
provided through this Agreement.
32. Affirmative Action Policy:
The Subrecipient shall make a "good faith" effort to ensure that all projects funded wholly or in part by
CDBG funds shall provide equal employment and career advancement opportunities for minorities and
women. A "good faith" effort includes, but is not limited to, advertising in one or more minority or women's
publications; direct solicitations; and requesting assistance from minority and women community
organizations, contractor groups, local state or federal minority and women business assistance office or
other organizations that provide assistance to in the recruitment and placement of minorities and women.
6
In addition, the Subrecipient shall make every effort to employ residents of the area and shall keep a
record of the positions that have been created directly or as a result of this program.'
A Provision of Program Services
(1) The Subrecipient shall not on the ground of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual
orientation, disability or familial status exclude any person from participation in, deny any
person the benefits of, or subject any person to discrimination under any program or
activity funded in whole or in part with CDBG funds.
(2) The Subrecipient shall not under any program or activity funded in whole or in part with
CDBG funds, on the ground of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation,
disability, or familial status:
(a) Deny any facilities, services, financial aid or other benefits provided under the
program or activity.
(b) Provide any facilities, services, financial aid or other benefits which are different
or are provided in a different form from that provided to others under the program
or activity.
(c) Subject to segregated or separate treatment in any facility in, or in any manner
or process related to receipt of any service or benefit under the program or
activity.
(d) Restrict in any way access to, or in the enjoyment of any advantage or privilege
enjoyed by others in connection with facilities, services, financial aid, or other
benefits under the program or activity.
(e) Treat an individual differently from others in determining whether the individual
satisfies any admission, enrollment, eligibility, membership, or other requirement
or condition, which the individual must meet in order to be provided any facilities,
services, or other benefit provided under the program or activity.
(f) Deny an opportunity to participate in a program or activity as an employee.
(3) The Subrecipient may not utilize criteria or methods of administration which have the
effect of subjecting individuals to discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin,
sex, sexual orientation, disability, or familial status or have the effect of defeating or
substantially impairing accomplishment of the objectives of the program or activity with
respect to individuals of a particular race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation,
disability, or familial status.
(4) The Subrecipient, in determining the site or location of housing or facilities provided in
whole or in part with CDBG funds, may not make the selections of such site or location
which have the effect of excluding individuals from, denying them the benefits of, or
subjecting them to discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual
orientation, disability, or familial status or which have the purpose or the effect of
defeating or substantially impairing the accomplishment of the objectives of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 and amendments thereto.
(5) (a) In administering a program or activity funded in whole or in part with CDBG funds
regarding which the Subrecipient has previously discriminated against persons
on the grounds of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability,
or familial status, the Subrecipient must take affirmative actions to overcome the
effects of prior discrimination.
(b) Even in the absence of such prior discrimination the Subrecipient, in
administering a program or activity funded in whole in part with CDBG funds,
should take affirmative action to overcome the effects of conditions which would
otherwise result in limiting participation by persons of a particular race, color,
national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or familial status. Where
previous discriminatory practice or usage tends, on the grounds of race, color,
national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or familial status, to exclude
individuals from participation in, to deny them the benefits or, or to subject them
to discrimination under any program or activity to which CDBG funding applies,
7
the Subrecipient has an obligation to take reasonable action to remove or
overcome the consequences of the prior discriminatory practice or usage, and to
accomplish the purpose of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and amendments thereto.
(c) The Subrecipient shall not be prohibited by this part from taking any eligible
action to ameliorate an imbalance in services or facilities provided to any
geographic area or specific group of persons within its jurisdiction where the
purpose of such action is to overcome prior discriminatory practice or usage.
(6) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in Sections A(1 )-(5), nothing contained herein
shall be construed to prohibit the Subrecipient from maintaining or constructing separate
living facilities or rest room facilities for the different sexes. Furthermore, selection on the
basis of sex is not prohibited when institutional or custodial services can properly be
performed only by a member of the same sex as the recipients of the services.
B. Employment Discrimination
(1) The Subrecipient shall not discriminate against any employee or applicant for
employment because of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or
familial status. The Subrecipient shall take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are
employed, and that employees are treated, during employment, without regard to their
race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or familial status. Such
action shall include, but not be limited to, the following: employment, upgrading, demotion
or transfer, recruitment or recruitment advertising, layoff or termination, rate of pay or
other forms of compensation and selection for training including apprenticeship. The
Subrecipient agrees to post in a conspicuous place available to employees and
applicants for employment, notices setting forth the provisions of this nondiscrimination
clause.
(2) The Subrecipient shall, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by or
on behalf of the Subrecipient, state that all qualified applicants will receive consideration
for employment without regards to race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation,
disability, or familial status.
(3) The Subrecipient shall send to each labor union or representative of workers with whom
it has a collective bargaining agreement or other contract or understanding, a notice to
be provided by the City's contracting officers advising the labor union or workers'
representative of the Subrecipient's commitments under Section 202 of Executive Order
No. 11246 of September 24, 1965, and shall post copies of the notice in conspicuous
places available to employees and applicants for employment.
( 4) The Subrecipient shall comply with all provisions of Executive Order 11246 of September
24, 1965, and of the rules, regulations, and relevant orders of the Secretary of Labor.
(5) The Subrecipient shall furnish to the City all information and reports required by Executive
Order No. 11246 of September 24, 1965, and by the related rules, regulations, and
orders.
(6) In the event of the Subrecipient's failure to comply with any rules, regulations, or orders
required to be complied with pursuant to this Agreement, the City may cancel, terminate,
or suspend in whole or in part its performance and the Subrecipient may be declared
ineligible for further government contracts in accordance with the procedures authorized
in Executive Order No. 11246 of September 24, 1965, or by rule, regulation, or order of
the Secretary of Labor, or as otherwise provided by law.
(7) The Subrecipient shall include the provisions of the "Affirmative Action Policy,"
Paragraphs B.(1) through (6), above, in every subcontract or purchase order unless
exempted by rules, regulations, or order of the Secretary of Labor, issued pursuant to
Section 204 of Executive Order No. 11246 of September 24, 1965, so that such
provisions will be binding upon each subcontractor or vendor.
The Subrecipient shall take such action with respect to any subcontract or purchase order
as the City may direct as a means of enforcing such provisions including sanctions for
noncompliance; provided, however, that in the event the Subrecipient becomes involved
in, or is threatened with, litigation with a subcontractor or vendor as a result of such
8
33.
34.
direction by the City, the Subrecipient may request the United States to enter into such
litigation to protect the interests of the United States.
(8) The Subrecipient shall not discriminate on the basis of age in violation of any provision
of the Age Discrimination Act of 1975 (42 U.S.C. 6101 et seq.) or with respect to any
otherwise qualified disabled individual as provided in Section 504 of the Rehabilitation
Act of 1973 (29 U. S.C. 794). The Subrecipient shall also provide ready access to and use
of all CDBG funds assisted buildings to physically disabled persons in compliance with
the standards established in the Architectural Barriers Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. 4151 et
seq.) and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1992.
Religious Proselytizing or Political Activities:
The Subrecipient agrees that it will not perform or permit any religious proselytizing or political activities
in connection with the performance of this Agreement. Funds under this agreement will be used
exclusively for performance of the services required under this Agreement and no funds shall be used to
promote any religious or political activities. Further in accordance with 24 CFR 570.2000), et seq., the
Subrecipient shall not:
A Engage in inherently religious activities, such as worship, religious instruction, or proselytization,
as part of the programs or services funded under this part. If an organization conducts such
activities, the activities must be offered separately, in time or location, from the programs or
services funded under this part, and participation must be voluntary for the beneficiaries of the
HUD-funded programs or services;
B. Use direct CDBG funds to support any inherently religious activities, such as worship, religious
instruction, or proselytization;
C. Discriminate against a program beneficiary or prospective program beneficiary on the basis of
religion or religious beliefs;
D. Use CDBG funds for the acquisition, construction, or rehabilitation of structures to the extent that
those structures are used for inherently religious activities,
Faith Based Organizations:
Notwithstanding Paragraph 33 above, if Subrecipient is a Faith Based Organization, Subrecipient agrees
to abide by Executive Order 13279, as promulgated at 24 CFR 5.109, et. seq.
35. Alterations, Encumbrances, Mechanics' Liens:
The Subrecipient agrees that it will not make, or suffer to be made, any alterations to the CDBG funded
improvements, the property or any part thereof, without the prior written consent of the City. The
Subrecipient shall keep the property free from any encumbrances or liens arising out of any work
performed, material furnished, or obligations incurred by the Subrecipient. The Subrecipient agrees to
submit performance, and labor and materials bonds on any improvements over $5,000.00.
36. Notices:
All notices, memoranda, reports, drafts, and communications shall be served in writing. The notices shall
be sent to the following addresses.
City
Community Development - Housing
City of El Cajon
200 Civic Center Way
El Cajon, CA 92020
9
Subrecipient
Home Start, Inc.
Attn: Laura Tancredi-Baese,
Chief Executive Officer
5006 Texas St., Suite #203
San Diego, CA 92108
37. Amendments: Variations:
38.
39.
This writing with attachments embodies the whole of the Agreement of the parties hereto. There are no
oral Agreements not contained herein, except as herein provided, addition or variation of the terms of this
Agreement shall not be valid unless made in the form of a written amendment to the Agreement formally
approved and executed by the City Council.
Savings Clause:
If any provision of this Agreement is found to be invalid, void, or unenforceable, the remaining provisions
shall, insofar as reasonably possible, continue in full force in effect without being impaired or invalidated
in any way.
Exhibit(s):
The Exhibits to this Agreement are an integral part of this Agreement and have each been incorporated
herein.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have caused this Agreement to be executed as of the day and year first
written above.
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
CITY OF EL CAJON, a charter city and municipal
corporation,
By
Graham Mitchell, City Manager
Hom􀁿• Start, Inc. ') 􀂀
I r l By ( 􀀈J: , 􀀁􀀂 c-.e, --􀀃
10
Laura Tancredi-Baese
Chief Executive Officer
EXHIB IT "A"
SCOPE OF WORK AND BUDGET
Project: Motel Voucher Program
Contact Person: Laura Tancredi-Baese, Chief Executive Officer (619-933-9851)
Statement of Work: The Subrecipient agrees to use the Community Development Block Grant funds allocated
by the City for Fiscal Year 2019-2020 to provide the Motel Voucher Program Program/Project in the City of El
Cajon.
Section 1 - Work Description:
(To be completed by Subrecipient-must describe work activities approved by City Council)
Section 2 - Records and Reporting
The Subrecipient shall submit a Periodic Performance Report, which shall become Exhibit "C" hereto, for the
previous reporting period. Reporting periods must be monthly due to the short timeframe these funds will likely be
spent. Periodic Performance Reports are due by the 10th of the month following the reporting period. These
reports shall include the following information:
A Number of individual clients served (individual client may be a person or a household)
B. Race of clients served
C. Ethnicity of clients served (Hispanic, yes or no - a person may be of any race and be Hispanic)
D. Number of disabled clients served (as defined by the Social Security Administrative Guidelines)
E. Whether or not the head of the household is female
F. N umber of clients who are low income (per HUD guidelines)
G. Whether or not the client is an El Cajon resident.
H. N umber of new clients assisted.
In addition, a brief narrative (Exhibit "C-2") must accompany the report. Narrative should include (but is not
limited to) the following:
A Outreach methods used;
B. N umber and disposition of complaints received; and
C. Progress made toward goals as evidenced in Exhibit "A", or an explanation of lack thereof.
D. Any other accomplishments or problems/concerns the Agency wishes to report.
Section 3 - Key Program Goals and Timeline
services in the City of El Cajon during the period of May 13, 2020 to J une 30, 2021.
Section 4 - Budget
individuals with
The City agrees to pay Subrecipient a total sum of Forty Five Thousand Dollars and no/100s dollars ($45,000)
to assist in the provision of the above mentioned services. It is further agreed that no funding shall be disbursed
unless the Subrecipient is in full compliance with the provisions of this Agreement. The City shall make payment
of these funds on a reimbursement basis contingent upon a written request and submittal of receipts or appropriate
proof of payment from the Subrecipient. Payments will not be paid unless and until periodic reports are current.
Payments may be made on a monthly or quarterly basis, at the Subrecipient's option.
PROJECT TITLE
I Motel Voucher Program
COST COMPONENT
PERSONNEL SERVICES
Salaries (See Schedule B of
A lication
Total Personnel
CONTRACTUAL SERVICES
Professional Services
Telephone
Utilities
Rent
I nsurance (required)
Maintenance
Travel/Mileage
Fingerprinting
Other ( specify) /¥lo I r ( J\ v,,11
Total Contractual
COMMODITIES
Program/Office Supplies
Printing
Postage/Office Equipment
Other (specify)
Total Commodities
Total Project Budget
EXHIBIT "A-2"
PUBLIC SERVICE PROGRAM BUDGET
CDBG FUNDS OTHER FUNDS5 IN-KIND TOTAL PROJECT
0 0 0 0
th ', ,) Cl p
0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0
Use the space below to explain professional services, office equipment expenditures or other cost
components that require clarification:
Note: CDBG paid expenditures must be documented with receipts and or invoices that verify the expense was
incurred. To minimize the amount of expense documentation, we strongly suggest the CDBG dollars be used to
pay for only a few program costs and not spread out over several line items. If CDBG funds are requested to pay
for Personnel Services (salaries), system-generated reports may be submitted, and copies of timecards,
paychecks, etc. may be retained in Subrecipient's administrative office, and must be made available for review
upon request as set forth in Paragraph 9 of this Agreement.
5 I ncludes Federal and non- Federal funding sources
FY2019-2020 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT CORONA VIRUS PROGRAM
REQUEST FOR PAYMENT
**NOTE: To request Electronic Version of this form, send an e-mail to rvalles@cityofelcajon.us
EXHIBIT "B"
This Request for Payment is presented to the City of El Cajon to obtain reimbursement for the operation of the Project named below for the Payment Period listed below. The payment is
requested for the portion of the contract budget stated in Column B.
SUB RECIPIENT
PAYMENT PERIOD
PREPARED BY
FY 2018-19
Job Title
Job Title
Job Title
Salaries & Wages
Payroll Taxes
Fringe Benefits
PERSONNEL
Office Suplies
Postage
Rent and Utilities
Telephone
Other fV\ ;;; •1 ,e I S l::, vl
Other
Other
Other
Other
NON-PERSONNEL
(TOTAL PROGRAM
$0
U! j < ;,,.
$0
$0
Expenditures tol
Date
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
Name
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00 $0.00 $0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00 $0.00 $0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00 $0.00 $0.00
$0.00 $0.00 $0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
PROJECT
TOTAL PAYMENT
OCT
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
Phone
NOV
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
DEC
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
JAN
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
FEB
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
MAR
Total
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00 $0.00 $0.00
$0.00 $0.00 $0.00
----
$0.00 $0.00 $0.00
$0.00 $0.00 $0.00
I hereby certify the above expenditures were incurred in carrying out the objective of the project contract, are authorized in the approved contract budget, and that contracted services were
performed in accordance with the Agreement.
Date Signature & Title of Subrecipient Executive
C I TY O F EL CAJ O N EXH I BIT " C "
COMMU N!\ DEVE LOPMENT BLOC K G RANT-C\ ROG RAM
P E R I O D I C PERFORMANCE RE PORT
FY Period Reported: ___F_ Y􀂷2"'"0-'-1 9-'------2 _0_ 2-'- 0_ ______ Quarter/Month Reported: ______________
Agency Name: _________________ _ Reporter's Name: ________________ _
Program Name: _________________ _ Phone N umber: _________________ _
Numbers served must reflect number of Persons (Pl served. Number of Households (H) served may only be reported with prior
approval of the Redevelopment & Housing Division.
Please indicate (P) or (H) : ______________ Annual City Grant Amount: _____________ _
1 . TOTAL
White
Black / African American
Asian
American Indian / Alaskan
Native
Native Hawaiian / Other
Pacific Islander
American Indian / Alaskan
Native and White
Asian and White
Black / African American
and White
American Indian / Alaskan
Native & Black / African
American
Other/Multi-Racial
2. TOTAL
Extremely Low Income
(0-30% MFI)
Low Income
>30-50% M FI
Moderate Income
(>50-80% MFI
Income above 80% fy'IFI
3. TOTAL
Homeless
Female Headed Households
Disabled/Special Needs
(A)
Number of Persons
served with El Cajon's
CDBG funding this
Quarter/Month
Total # Each Race
(8)
How many in Column
(A) reported as
Hispanic (this
Quarter/Month for Each
Race)?
Total # of Hispanics
Each Race
(C)
C umulative number of
(D)
Persons served How many in Column
Year-To-Date (C) reported as
(July 1 to end of
current report period)
Hispanic Year-To-Date?
Total # Each Race Total # of Hispanics
Year-to-Date Each Race Year-to-Date
IMPORTANT-PLEASE NOTE: 1) Hispanic is no longer considered a race, but an ethnicity and must be reported separately. A
member of any race must also report as Hispanic or Non-Hispanic. "Other" is for m ulti-racial reports only and must be identified i n
the narrative report. 2 ) Totals for lines 1 , 2 , a n d 3 must match each other for each column. 3 ) List only unduplicated program
participants-clients receiving continued services from previous fiscal year may be counted only once during the new contract year.
4) A narrative report must accompany this form. The narrative should include the definition of "Persons Served" (typically El Cajon
residents) and should reflect all additional data collected as agreed in the contract such as Number of Families served, Number of
Projects Completed, Number of Program Hours provided, Number of Bed Nights provided, or other Performance Outcome
Measurements. For questions, please call the Housing Division at (61 9) 441 -1 786.
Rev. 06/1 3/201 4 h:lrh\cdbg-homelyr45-2019 - 2020\agreements with subslcdbg-cv\exhibits b-c-c-2 and d\exhibit c - periodic program report_ 19-20,doc
CDBG LOW M(Y ':;LIENTELE NATIONAL OBJECTIVE REPOP􀀫
_ ,DERAL FISCAL YEAR 201 9-20
PROJECT STATUS NARRATIVE
EXH I B I T "C-2"
The purpose of this form is to report accomplishment data for the project named below. This form must be completed for projects providing
eligible CD BG/HOME activities to Low to Moderate Income residents of the City of El Cajon. This form must be completed and submitted
with each monthly/quarterly Periodic Performance Report.
AGENCY NAME:
PROJECT NAME:
REPORTING PERIOD:
PREPARED BY:
NAME PHONE
PROJECT STATUS : Pending D Active D Complete O Date: ______ _
PROJECT STATUS NARRATIVE:
S U BJ E CT :
R E F E RE N C E :
P U RPOSE
C ITY OF EL CAJ O N
C I TY C O U N C I L P OL I CY
I n s u ra n ce Req u i rements
Ado pted 7 /26/94
Amen d ed 1 1 /29/05
Ame n d ed 04/1 4/1 5
EXH I B IT D
POLICY
D-3
E F F E CTIVE PAG E
04/1 4/1 5 1 of 8
To provide a un iform C ity policy for liability insurance requ irements a nd to esta b lish procedures for
its con s i sten t a p p l ication .
BACKGROU N D
T o help p rotect the City against l i a b il ity, a l l i n d ivid uals, contractors , agencies and organizations
conductin g b u siness i n association with , on beh alf of, or in certai n circumstances within the City of
E l Cajon are requ i red to m ainta i n adeq uate liabil ity i n s u ra n ce coverage acceptable to the C ity.
Because of the d iffering levels of p rotection needed for various activities conducted with in the City,
the C ity has esta b lished policy l i m its and sta ndards w h i c h d irectly relate to the type of activity
being con d u cted .
POLICY
Al l ind ivi d u a ls, contractors , agencies, and organ izations conducting busin ess either for the City of
E l Caj o n (or the S u ccessor Agency to the El C aj o n Redevelopment Agency) or p u rsuant to a n
o rd i n a nce, resolution , agreement or policy requ irin g the maintenance o f liabi l ity insurance s h a l l
p rovide p roof of l i a b i l ity insurance i n the following amou nts and written on an occu rrence basis
(claims made coverage will be accepted o n ly after verifying that occu rrence coverage is not
available ) :
1 . A com b i ned s i n g le l im it policy with aggregate l i m its i n the amount of $2 m il lion for a l l
co nstruction p rojects a n d for carnivals, s u b d ivisions, and pollution coverage subject to
section 5.c. under the headi n g " I NS U RA N C E STAN DARDS," with a m?ximu m ded uctible
or self- i n s u ra n ce retention ("SI R") of $500,000; for policies n ot having a "combined s ingle
lim it," m i n i m u m l i mits i n amou nts as follows :
C o m me rcial General Liability (CGL): I ns u rance Services Office Form CG 00 0 1 covering
CGL on an "occu rrence" basis, including p rod ucts and completed operations, property
damage, bod i ly i nj u ry and personal & advertising i nj u ry with l im its n o less than $ 1 ,000,000
per occu rrence. If a general aggregate l i m it applies, e ither the general aggregate l imit shall
a pply separately to this p roject/location or the general agg regate limit s h a l l be twice the
req u i red occu rre n ce limit.
U n less staff d etermines that circumstances ( i . e . h ig h risk project, etc.) requ i re the h ig he r
limit, the $2,000,000 l i m it s h a l l b e decreased to $ 1 ,000,000 with a maxim u m ded uctible o r
S I R o f $ 1 50,000, when:
S U BJ ECT :
R E F E RENCE :
C I TY O F EL CAJ O N
C I TY CO U N C I L P OL I CY
Insu ra n ce Req u irements
Adop ted 7 /26/94
Amended 1 1 /29/05
Amended 04/1 4/1 5
EXH I BIT D
POLICY
D-3
E F F E CTIVE PAG E
04/1 4/1 5 2 of 8
a. The p u blic improvements portion of a s u bd ivision project is less than $50,000; or
b. A construction p roject (in accorda nce with the Standard S pecifications for Public
Works Construction-and the Standard S pecial P rovisions, the "Green Book") is for
less tha n $50 , 000.
2. Except a s othe rwise provided i n th is policy, a combined single limit policy with aggregate
limits in the amount of $2 million for all others, including, b ut not limited to, ath letic leagues,
recreatio n g roups, towing compan ies and pu blic service agencies ; for policies not having a
"combined sin g le limit," m i n i m u m limits i n amou n ts as fol lows:
Commercia l Genera l Liab il ity (CGL): I ns u rance Services Office Form CG 00 01 covering
CGL on an "occu rrence" basis, including p rod ucts and completed operations, property
damage, bodi ly i nj u ry and perso nal & advertising i njury with limits no less than $ 1 ,000, 000
per occu rrence. If a genera l aggregate limit applies, e ither the general aggregate limit shall
apply separately to this project/location or the genera l aggregate limit shall be twice the
req u i red occu rrence limit.
3 . A combined s i n g l e l im it policy with agg regate limits i n the amount of $250,000 for
homeowners insura n ce o r $500,000 for commercial general liabil ity i ns u rance for small
b usiness owne rs , i n either event only where the insura nce is requ ired for work in the public
rig ht-of-way. "Small business owners" a re defined as commercial businesses , o r a
professional or administrative office uses , where the owners of the b usiness work on-site
as their p rimary calling o r vocatio n , and having no more th an two (2) employees not related
by blood or marriage .
4 . Selected h igh-risk a ctivities that wou ld otherwise fal l u nder the criteria for category 2 shall
be eval uated by staff on a case-by-case basis to d etermine whether or n ot the above limits
are s ufficient. The imposition of liability limits exceeding $2 million for s uch h igh -risk
activities is appealable to the C ity Cou n cil.
5. $1 ,000, 000 for taxicab compan ies.
6 . $500 ,000 o r actual val u e , whichever i s g reater, for "valuable papers" a n d " i n tran sit"
insurance where C ity records or personal property is being transported or stored outside of
City pro perty.
EXH I B IT D
S U BJECT :
REFERE NC E :
C I TY O F E L CAJ O N
C I TY C O U N C I L P O L I CY
I nsurance Req u irements
Adopted 7 /26/94
Amended 1 1 /29/05
Amended 04/1 4/1 5
POLICY
D-3
E F FECTIVE PAG E
04/1 4/1 5 3 of 8
7 . Exceptions to the above limits may b e made fo r n o n-profit, charitable, political, commun ity
and rel ig ious o rgan izations.
8 . The policy o r policies o f insu ra n ce may b e for all operations o r activities o f the pa rty
purchasing the policy o r policies provided , h owever, that the C ity or the Successor Agency
may req uire a sepa rate p o licy exclusively for operations of the purchaser where the City
Manager, i n h is o r her sole discretio n , determi nes that a s ing le policy would be i nadequate
to protect the City o r Successor Agency in the event of mu ltiple catastrophes.
9 . Workers' compensation insurance shall meet the m i n im u m limits req u ired by law.
INSURANCE STAN DARDS
1 . ADM ITTED CARR I ER / B EST'S RAT I N G A, C LASS VI I
a. I nsurers must be "ad mitted" carriers p ursuant to the p rovisions of the Californ ia
I n surance Code and i n accordance with all requirements of the State Insurance
Commission and must be listed i n the:
"OFFICIAL P U B L I CATI O N
D E PARTME NT O F I N S U RANCE
STATE O F CALI FORNIA
45 Fremont Street
San Francisco, Californ ia 941 05
I N S U RANCE O R GAN IZATIONS AUTH O RIZED BY TH E I N S U RANCE
COM M I S S I O N TO TRANSACT B U S I N ESS O F I NS U RANCE
I N TH E STATE O F CAL I FOR N IA D U R I NG
[th e most recent year for wh ich
the publication is available]."
or
"Californ ia Department of I nsurance Company Profile."
S U BJ ECT :
C I TY O F E L C AJ O N
C I TY C O U N C I L PO L I CY
I ns u rance Req u i rements
EXHIBIT D
P O L I C Y
D-3
REFEREN C E : Adopted 7 /26/94 E F FE CTIVE PAG E
Amended 1 1 /29/05
Amended 04/1 4/1 5 04/1 4/1 5 4 of 8
b . I nsurers m ust h ave a Best's rating of A , C lass VII o r h igher (th is rating includes
those insurers with a minimum policyholder's surplus of $50 to $ 1 00 million).
Exceptions to the Best's rating may be considered when an insurance carrier meets
a l l othe r standards and can satisfy s u rplus amounts eq u iva lent to an A, Class VI I
rating. An exception to the rating requ irement may be made for the California State
Compensation I nsurance F u n d if n ot rated.
2. NON-ADM ITTED CAR R I E R / BEST' S RAT I N G A, Class XI I
Exceptions to the "admitted" req u i rement may be considered when a non -adm itted
insurance carrier meets all other standard s herein and:
a. is either (i) listed i n :
Californ ia Department o f Insurance
L ist of Approved S u rplus Line I nsu rers
LISTI N G O F F I L I N GS
or (ii) is cu rrently a party to co-operation agreements with foreign insurance
regu latory authorities acceptab le to the City Manager o r C ity Attorney (for example,
for insurers located in the U n ited Kingdom, agreements m ust be with both the
P rudential Regulatory Authority ("PRA") and the Financial Conduct Authority ("FCA") ,
or such successor auth ority o r authorities of P RA and FCA;
b . e ither the carrier or its parent company h as a Best's rating of A , Class VI I (th is rating
i nclude those insurers with a m i n i m u m policyholder's surplus of $50 to $ 1 00 millio n ;
c. h as ten years or more experience in the business of insurance; and
d. if applicable, the reinsu rance carrier h as a qualified rating.
3. G E N E RAL - I NS U RANCE CERTI FICATES / ADD ITI ONAL I N S U R E D
All insu rers (includ ing those insuring against pollution or d ischarges o f hazard ous
materials) m ust provid e certificates of insurance and end orsements evidencing cove rage
prior to the start of any contract. All certificates or endorsements m ust i nclude:
S U BJ ECT :
C I TY O F E L CAJ O N
C I TY COUN C I L P OL I CY
Insura n ce Req u i rements
EXH I B IT D
P O L I C Y
D-3
R E F E R E NC E : Adopted 7 /26/94 E FF E C T I V E PAG E
Amended 1 1 /2 9/05
Amended 04/1 4/1 5
• Name of insura n ce company issu ing each policy.
04/1 4/1 5 5 of 8
Al l insurers m ust provide a n original endorsement n·aming the C ity of El Cajon
(and/or the Successor Agency to the El Cajon Redevelopment Agency) , and its
(their) elected a n d appointed officia ls, officers, employees and volunteers (for
p urposes of this Policy, ind ividually a n d c o l lect ive ly, the " C ity I n s u red s") as
add itio n a l i n s u re d s . T h is i n c l u s i o n a s add itional insureds shall not be req u ired of
Workers' Compensation or professional liability policies of insurance, and may be
waived for "valuable papers" coverage with the approval of the C ity Attorney.
• All insurers m ust provide an original endorsement stating that the insurance
coverage shall be primary insurance as respects the City of E l Cajon (and/or the
S uccessor Age n cy to the El Cajon Redevelopment Agency) , and its (their) elected
a nd appointed officials, officers, employees and vol u nteers (for pu rposes of this
P olicy, ind ivid ually and collectively, the "City Insureds. Any insurance o r selfinsurance
maintained by the Entity, its office rs , officia ls, employees, or volu nteers
shal l be excess of the Contractor's insurance and shall not con tribute with it.
• Waiver of S u b rogation endorsement is req u ired on Workers' Compensation
Coverage.
• Add ress of named insured .
• Description of coverage , includ i ng any special coverage req uired by the contract.
• Policy n u mbers .
e Policy periods ( I f claims made basis, m ust i n clude retroactive date and length of
time allowed as extended reporting period) .
• Coverage type (occu rrence form vs . claims made) .
• Auth orized signatu re and d ate of issuance . An o rig inal signatu re is requ ired : a
d igital s ign ature is acceptable so l ong as it complies with the req u irements of
Government Code § 1 6 . 5 .
• U nless approved by the City Manager o r desig nee , no certificate shall be accepted
that qualifies the o bl igation of the carrier to provide 30 days written notice of
cancellation of the policy. With the approval of the C ity Attorney the obligatio n to
provide notice of cancellation may be red uced to ten (1 0) days , but o n ly for
termination d ue to the non-paymen t of any prem i u m .
S U BJECT :
REFEREN C E :
C I TY OF EL CAJON
C I TY C O U N C I L PO LICY
I nsurance Req u irements
Adopted 7 /26/94
Amended 1 1 /29/05
Amended 04/1 4/1 5
EXH I B IT D
P O L I C Y
D-3
E F F E CTIVE PAG E
04/1 4/1 5 6 of 8
4 . P U B L I C WOR KS P ROJ ECTS
In addition to the standards set forth above , insurance policies for p ublic works projects
m ust also meet the following insurance req u i rements set out. i n the most recent ed ition of
the Green Book adopted by the C ity Counci l :
a . A l l insura nce certificates s h a l l bear a n endorsement or s h a l l h ave attached a rider
whereby it is provided that, in the event of expiration or proposed cancellation of
such policy for any reason whatsoever, the City sha l l b e notified by certified mail,
retu rn receipt req uested , g iving a sufficient time befo re the date thereof to comply
with any applicable law o r statute , but i n no event less than th i rty (30) days before
expiration or cancel lation is effective, the provisions of section 3 herein
n otwithstanding; and
b. Compliance with Labor Code §§3700 and 3800 relating to Workers' Compensat ion .
c. Req u i rements of the Green Book shall p revail.
5. P U B L IC R I G H T-OF-WAY
An app lica nt for permit(s) to do work with i n the public rig ht-of-way may esta blish
satisfactory proof of liability insura nce i n the fol lowing manner:
a . CONTRACTO RS
Contractors must furnish the City with a certificate of liability insurance, wh ich meets
the req u i rements set forth a bove and any other City req u irements contained i n this
policy.
b. H O M EOWN ERS / P RO P E RTY OWN ERS
H omeowners/Property owners req uesting a permit to do work with in City rig hts-ofway
or easements i mmed i ately adjacent to their respective owned or occu p ied
p roperty, solely for the owner's personal benefit, shall be req u ired to fu rnish the City
with a copy of their homeowner's/property owner's liability i n s u rance policy, wh ich
meets the req u irements set forth a bove , with the min imum limits described i n
category 3 under the head ing " POLICY," a bove. The policy must b e effective d u ring
the entire period of the proposed work, plus two (2) calendar years , a nd m ust
p rovide coverage for claims arising from the work performed , or improvements
owned , by the h omeowner i n the rig ht-of-way or easement. If the encroachment is
S U BJ E C T :
R E F E RE N C E :
C I TY O F E L CAJ O N
C I TY COU N C I L P OL I CY
Insurance Req u i rements
Adopted 7/26/94
Amended 1 1 /29/05
Amended 04/1 4/1 5
EXH I B IT D
P O L I C Y
D-3
E F F E CTIVE PAG E
04/1 4/1 5 7 of 8
ongoing, a n n ual proof of insurance shall be req u ired. The requ i rement to name the
C ity as an a d d itional insured , and the req u irement for a policy for two (2) additional
calendar years , may each be waived by the C ity Council or the C ity Manager (or her
designee) in cases of extreme hardsh i p , in their d iscretio n .
c. POLLUTI O N EXC L U S I O N
Appl ications for t h e installation o f m a n itoring wells for the evaluation o f groundwater
pollution or for the d ischarge of formerly polluted g ro u n dwater i nto the C ity sewer
system m ust be accompanied by a certificate of liability insurance provided by the
property owner. Such liability insurance may not contai n a pollution exclusion clause
and must exp licitly indemnify the C ity against all haza rds wh ich may resu lt from
either of these activities, including a worsening of pollutio n , e ither within the
subsurface adjacen t to the original pollution o r withi n the C ity sewer system .
If t h e property owne r is u na ble to provid e insurance wh ich addresses both genera l
liability a n d pollution liabil ity, the enviro n mental company or oth er appropriately
qualified entity contracting with the p roperty owner for either mon itoring wel l
i nstal lation o r g ro u ndwater pollution remediation , may fu rnish pollution liability
insurance on beha lf of the property owner.
Any i nsurance approved u nder th is su bsection c. shall be an occurrence policy, and
shall otherwise comply with the provisions of th is Policy.
d. P U B L I C UTI LITIES
This policy as it relates to work i n the p u blic rig hts-of-way shall not be applicable to
Cable TV, Helix Water District, Padre Dam Mun icipal Water District, S B C , San
D iego Gas & E lectric, or a ny other public utility.
e. TRANS P ORTAT I O N / OVERSIZE LOADS - PERMITS - See Chapter 1 0.24 of the
El C ajon M u n icipal Code.
S U BJECT :
REFEREN C E :
C ITY O F E L CAJ O N
C I TY C O U N C I L P O LICY
Insurance Req u i rements
Adopted 7 /26/94
Ame nded 1 1 /29/05
Amended 04/1 4/1 5
TIME LIM ITS / CANCELLATION PROVISIONS
EXH I B I T D
P O L I C Y
D-3
E F F E CTIVE PAG E
04/1 4/1 5 8 of 8
All liab i lity i n s u rance req u i red p u rsuant to th is policy shall provide coverage for a sufficient time
period to protect the C ity from liabil ity. The insurer is req u i red to provide a minimum of th i rty (30)
d ays-n otice of ca ncellation of any policy. With the approval of the City Attorney (except as
p rovided in section 4, herein) t h is obligation may be red uced to n ot less than ten (1 0) days written
n otice, but o n ly for termi nation d u e to the non-payment of any premi u m . I n no event shall a policy
be accepted wh ich termi nates prior to the completion of the activity to be covered .
I n certain circu mstances , it may be i m p racticable to obtain conti n u ing insurance coverage d u e to
the d u ration of the activity or the cost of prematu re renewal. Unde r such circu mstances , a n
exception to t h e coverage period may b e made s o long a s the policy is renewed or replaced with
an acceptab le insurance carrier and there is no lapse in coverag e . Maintenance of p roper
insura nce coverage is a material term of any contract with the C ity and failure to maintain or
renew cove rage o r to provide evidence of renewa l may be treated as a material breach of
contract.
ALTERNATIVE RISK MANAGEMENT PRACTI C ES: S E LF-INSURAN C E ; RISK-POOLING
Alternative risk ma nagement practices, s uch as self-insurance, risk pooling, risk retention g ro ups,
and other such programs, will be accepted i n lieu of commercial insura nce policies provided that
the coverage meets the req u i rements of th is Policy. Any such a lte rnative risk management
p ractices m ust meet the financial strength and surplus requirements reflected by the B est's
Ratings req u ired of commercial insurance u nder this Policy.
EXHIBIT " E"
DECLARATION OF ECON OMIC INTERESTS
In submitting its proposal, SUBRECIPIENT represents that SUBRECIPIENT's responses to the following
questions are true and correct:
1. The proposed public project may affect the market value of real property in the vicinity of the project site.
a. Does the SUBRECIPIENT or anyone in the SUBRECIPIENT's organization
have a financial interest in real property located within 2500 feet of the project
site?
b. Has the SUBRECIPIENT or anyone in the SUBRECIPIENT's organization,
rendered professional services concerning real property located within 2500
feet of the project site?
C. Has the SUBRECIPIENT or anyone in the SUBRECIPIENT's organization
received income from real property that is located within 2500 feet of the
project site?
2. The proposed project may affect businesses in the vicinity of the project site.
a. Does the SUBRECIPIENT or anyone in the SUBRECIPIENT's organization
have a financial interest in a business located within 2500 feet of the project
site?
b. Has the SUBRECIPIENT or anyone in the SUBRECIPIENT's organization
rendered professional services concerning a business that is located within
2500 feet of the project site?
C. Has the SUBRECIPIENT or anyone in the SUBRECIPIENT's organization
received income from a business that is located within 2500 feet of the project
site?
3. Does anyone in SUBRECIPIENT's organization have a spouse or other family
member who has a financial interest in any such real property or business?
SUBRECIPIENT'S SIGNATURE
Home Start, Inc.
Yes
□
□
□
□
□
□
□
This document is signed by an individual clearly authorized to bind SUBRECIPIENT.
/\ 􀀅 A
By 􀀉l -Jviuwh
Laura Tancredi-Baese, Chief Executive Officer
Date:
No
􀁋
@
f;3
121
􀁌
1:21
13
EXHIBIT "F"
0MB CIRCULAR A-1 33 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
AUDITS OF STATES, LOCAL GOVERNMENTS AND
NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS
CFDA No. for this Grant/Agreement: 14.21 8 (Community Development Block Grant)
Non-Federal entities that expend $750, 000 or more in a year in Federal awards shall have a single or programspecific
audit conducted for that year in accordance with the provisions of 0MB Circular
A-1 33. Please complete the following by placing an "X" in the appropriate box.
IZI
□
L/ 0 ,N"1 e j }, ,1:' r , ·r. 11 , expended $750,000 or more in
Federal funds during the prior fiscal year ( FY 201 8-1 9)/calendar year (20 1 8) .
did not expend $750,000 o r more in
Federal funds during the prior fiscal year ( FY 201 8-1 9)/calendar year (201 8).
I HER EBY C E RTIFY I have the authority to sign for the above named agency and that the agency will comply
with the provisions of 0MB Circular A-1 33 and any other applicable Federal and State laws and regulations
hereinafter enacted.
By:
Print Name
Title:
Date:
EXHIBIT "G"
WORKER'S COMPENSATION INSURANCE CERTIFICATE
The Subrecipient shall execute the following form as required by the California Labor Code,
Sections 1860 and 1861.
I am aware of the provision of Section 3700 of the Labor Code which requires every employer to
be insured against liability for worker's compensation or to undertake self-insurance in accordance
with the provisions of that code, and I will comply with such provisions before commencing the
performance of the work of this contract.
Home Start, Inc.
By:
Laura Tancredi-Baese, Chief Executive Officer