AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE CITY OF LA MESA, CALIFORNIA, AND HOME START, INC. FOR HOUSING STABILITY SERVICES UTILIZING COMMUNITY 
DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT CORONAVIRUS FUNDS 
·cg
THIS AGREEMENT, entered this '1. day of Ser:rte..Mlo e,,r, 2021 by and between the City of La Mesa, a municipal corporation hereinafter referred to as the "CITY", and Home Start, Inc., herein referred to as the "SUBRECIPIENT." 
WHEREAS, the CITY has applied for and received funds from the United States Government under Title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended (HCD Act), Public Law 93-383 (Catalogue of Federal Domestic Assistance# 14.218); 
WHEREAS, the CITY has adopted Resolution No. 2021-015 approving the commitment of Fiscal Year 2020 Community Development Block Grant Coronavirus (CDBG-CV) funds to be used by the SUBRECIPIENT in the performance of housing stability services described in the Scope of Service; and, 
WHEREAS, the SUBRECIPIENT represents that it can perform the work as set forth in the Scope of Service and that it has the expertise and experience to perform such work for the CITY. 
NOW, THEREFORE, the parties do mutually agree as follows: 

SECTION 1: ENGAGEMENT OF CONSUL TANT 
The City hereby agrees to engage SUBRECIPIENT and SUBRECIPIENT hereby agrees to perform the services set forth in this Agreement. The term of this Agreement is from October 1, 2021 to September 30, 2022. 

SECTION 2: SCOPE OF SERVICE 
A. Activities 
The SUBRECIPIENT shall provide a public service program in a manner satisfactory to the CITY and consistent with any standards required as a condition of providing these funds. Such program will include the all of the tasks and items listed and described in Exhibit A, attached hereto and incorporated herein as part of this agreement. 
B. General Administration 
The SUBRECIPIENT shall maintain a full accounting of Community Development Block Grant funding as required by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and comply with all federal regulations for personnel management, audit and fund management. SUBRECIPIENT shall maintain and retain financial and personnel records and access to such records shall be made available to the CITY upon Request. 
C. National Objectives 
All activities funded with CDGB program funds must meet the National Objectives of benefit to low-and moderate-income persons. 
The SUBRECIPIENT certifies that the activities carried out under this Agreement will meet the national objective of benefiting low and moderate income people, by providing services to homeless persons. 
D. Goals and Performance Measures 
The SUBRECIPIENT agrees to serve at least 50 unduplicated clients. 
E. Staffing 
The SUBRECIPIENT shall provide a housing stability case manager. No substitutions in staffing will be made without prior written approval by the City. 
F. Performance Monitoring 
The CITY will monitor the performance of the SUBRECIPIENT against goals and performance standards as stated above. Substandard performance as determined by the CITY will constitute noncompliance with this Agreement. If action to correct such substandard performance is not taken by the SUBRECIPIENT within a reasonable period of time after being notified by the CITY, contract suspension or termination procedures will be initiated. 

SECTION 3: TIME OF PERFORMANCE 
Services of the SUBRECIPIENT shall start on October 1, 2021 and end on September 30, 2022. The term of this Agreement and the provisions herein shall be extended to cover any additional time period during which the SUBRECIPIENT has not completed all of the tasks included in the Scope of Services, remains in control of CDBG funds or other CDBG assets, including program income. Subrecipient must provide Grantee written notification of the final day on which it controlled CDBG funds (or other assets, including program income) if the term is so extended and subrecipient does not renew or execute a new CDBG agreement with Grantee. 

SECTION 4: PROJECT BUDGET 
Upon request, the SUBRECIPIENT shall provide a more detailed budget breakdown than the one provided in the initial application. The SUBRECIPIENT shall provide such supplementary budget information in a timely fashion in the form and content prescribed by the CITY. 

SECTION 5: PAYMENT 
It is expressly agreed and understood that the total amount to be paid by the CITY under this Agreement shall not exceed three hundred thirty-eight thousand dollars ($338,000). Request for payments shall be made on a monthly basis. 
Monthly payments will be made based on the submittal of a monthly financial statement, quarterly performance report, and letter of request signed by the executive office of the agency. Reimbursable expenses may include, but are not limited to salaries and benefits, rent and utilities, insurance, subscriptions and memberships, supplies, postage and printing. Payments may be contingent upon certification of the SUBRECIPIENT's financial management system in accordance with the standards specified in 2 C.F.R. 
200, et. seq., and, in particular, 2 C.F.R. 200.302. Payment shall be contingent upon HUD's delivery of payment to City. 
SECTION 6: REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 
A. Quarterly Performance Report 
The SUBRECIPIENT shall submit a quarterly Performance Report (July through September, October through December, January through March, April through June) by the twentieth of the month following the close of the quarter. The quarterly report shall include a narrative and a summary of the following statistical data in the format provided by the CITY: 
1. 
The total number of clients served from the City of La Mesa. Count separately the number of first time clients and the repeat or continuing clients. 

2. 
The household characteristics of La Mesa clients served, for example, single person household, female head of household, or families. 

3. 
The number of persons served who earn 30% or less than the current median income level for San Diego County established by HUD. 

4. 
The number of persons served who earn 50% or less than the current median income level for San Diego County established by HUD. 

5. 
The number of persons served who earn 80% or less than the current median income level for San Diego County established by HUD. 

6. 
The race and/or ethnicity of the La Mesa clients served by the program. 


B. Final Performance Report 
Within 16 days following the close of the contract period the SUBRECIPIENT shall submit a final report of achievements for the year, summarizing the range of activities provided and the cumulative totals of the clients served. 


SECTION 7: NOTICES 
All communications to either party by the other shall be deemed given when made in writing and delivered or mailed to such party at its respective address as follows: 
CITY:  SUBRECIPIENT:  
City of La Mesa  Home Start, Inc.  
Community Development Director  Chief Executive Officer  
8130 Allison Avenue  5005 Texas Street, Suite 203  
La Mesa CA 91942  San Diego, CA 92108  
619-667-1177  619-692-0727  

SECTION 8: GENERAL CONDITIONS 
A. General Compliance 
The SUBRECIPIENT agrees to comply with the requirements of Title 24 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 570 (the U.S. Housing and Urban Development regulations concerning Community Development Block Grants (CDBG)) including subpart K of these regulations, except that (1) the SUBRECIPIENT does not assume the recipient's environmental responsibilities described in 24 CFR 570.604 and (2) the SUBRECIPIENT does not assume the recipient's responsibility for initiating the review process under the provisions of 24 CFR Part 52. The SUBRECIPIENT also agrees to comply with all other applicable Federal, state and local laws, regulations, and policies governing the funds provided under this contract. The SUBRECIPIENT further agrees to utilize funds available under this Agreement to supplement rather than supplant funds otherwise available. 
B. Independent Contractor 
Nothing contained in this Agreement is intended to, or shall be construed in anymanner, as creating or establishing the relationship of employer/employee between the parties. The SUBRECIPIENT shall at all times remain an independent contractor with respect to the services to be performed under this Agreement. Because the SUBRECIPIENT is an independent contractor, the CITY shall be exempt from payment of all Unemployment Compensation, FICA, retirement, life and/or medical insurance and Workers' Compensation Insurance. 
C. Hold Harmless 
Indemnity for Professional Liability: 
When the law establishes a professional standard of care for SUBRECIPIENT'S Services, to the fullest extent permitted by law, SUBRECIPIENT shall indemnify,protect, defend, and hold harmless City and any and all of its officials, employees and agents from and against any and all losses, liabilities, damages, costs, and expenses, including legal counsel's fees and costs but only to the extent the SUBRECIPIENT (and its Subconsultants), are responsible for such damages, liabilities and costs on a comparative basis of fault between the SUBRECIPIENT (and its Subconsultants) and the City in the performance of professional services under this agreement. 

Indemnity for Other Than Professional Liability: 
Other than in the performance of professional services and to the full extent permitted by law, SUBRECIPIENT shall indemnify, defend, and hold harmless City, and any and all of its employees, officials and agents from and against any liability (including liability for claims, suits, actions, arbitration proceedings, administrative proceedings, regulatory proceedings, losses, expenses or costs of any kind, whether actual, alleged or threatened, including legal counsel's fees and costs, court costs, defense costs, and expert witness fees), where the same arise out of, are a consequence of, or are in any way attributable to, in whole or in part, the performance of this Agreement by SUBRECIPIENT or by any individual or City for which SUBRECIPIENT is legally liable, including, but not limited to officers, agents, employees, or subcontractors of SUBRECIPIENT, except when caused by the active negligence or willful misconduct of the City. 
This section shall survive termination or expiration of this Agreement. 
D. Workers' Compensation 
The SUBRECIPIENT shall comply with all of the provisions of the Workers' Compensation Insurance and Safety Acts of the State of California, the applicable provisions of Division 4 and 5 of the California Labor Code and all amendments thereto; and all similar state or Federal acts or laws applicable; and shall indemnify, and hold harmless the CITY and its elected officials, officers, and employees from and against all claims, demands, payments, suits, actions, proceedings and judgments of every nature and description, including reasonable attorney's fees and defense costs presented,brought or recovered against the CITY or its elected officials, officers, employees, or volunteers, for or on account of any liability under any of said acts which may be incurred by reason of any work to be performed by the SUBRECIPIENT under this Agreement. 
E. Insurance & Bonding 
The SUBRECIPIENT shall carry sufficient insurance coverage to protect contract assets from loss due to theft, fraud and/or undue physical damage. 
Throughout the life of this Agreement, SUBRECIPIENT shall pay for and maintain in full force and effect all policies of insurance required hereunder with an insurance company(ies) either (i) admitted by the California Insurance Commissioner to do business in the State of California and rated not less than "A:VII" in Best's Insurance Rating Guide, or (ii) authorized by the City Manager or his/her designee at any time and in his/her sole discretion. The following policies of insurance are required: 
(i) COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY insurance which shall be at least as broad as the most current version of Insurance Services Office (ISO) Commercial General Liability Coverage Form CG 00 01 and include insurance for "bodily injury," "property damage" and "personal and advertising injury" with coverage for premises and operations (including the use of owned and non-owned equipment), products and completed operations, and contractual liability (including, without limitation, indemnity obligations under the Contract) with limits of liability of not less than the following: 
$2,000,000 per occurrence 
$4,000,000 general aggregate 
(ii) COMMERCIAL AUTOMOBILE LIABILITY insurance which shall be at least as broad as the most current version of Insurance Service Office (ISO) Business Auto Coverage Form CA 00 01, and include coverage for all owned, hired, and non-owned automobiles or other licensed vehicles (Code 1 Any Auto) with limits of liability of not less than $2,000,000 per accident for bodily injury and property damage. 
(iii) WORKERS' COMPENSATION insurance as required under the California Labor Code. 
(iv) 
EMPLOYERS' LIABILITY insurance with limits of liability of not less than $1,000,000 each accident, $1,000,000 disease policy limit and $1,000,000 disease each employee. 

(v) 
PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY (Errors and Omissions) insurance appropriate to SUBRECIPIENT's profession, with limits of liability of $2,000,000 per claim/occurrence and $2,000,000 policy aggregate. 


In the event SUBRECIPIENT purchases an Umbrella or Excess insurance policy(ies) to meet the minimum limits of insurance set forth above, this insurance policy(ies) shall "follow form" and afford no less coverage than the primary insurance policy(ies). 
SUBRECIPIENT shall be responsible for payment of any deductibles contained in any insurance policies required hereunder and SUBRECIPIENT shall also be responsible for payment of any self-insured retentions. Any deductibles or self-insured retentions must be declared to, and approved by, the City Manager or his/her designee. At the option of the City Manager or his/her designee, either: (i) the insurer shall reduce or eliminate such deductibles or self-insured retentions as respects to City, its elected officials, officers, officials, employees, agents and volunteers: or (ii) SUBRECIPIENT shall provide a financial guarantee, satisfactory to City Manager or his/her designee, guaranteeing payment of losses and related investigations, claim administration and defense expenses. At no time shall City be responsible for the payment of anydeductibles or self-insured retentions. 
All policies of insurance required hereunder shall be endorsed to provide that the coverage shall not be cancelled, non-renewed, reduced in coverage or in limits except after 30 calendar day written notice has been given to City. Upon issuance by the insurer, broker, or agent of a notice of cancellation, non-renewal, or reduction in coverage or in limits, SUBRECIPIENT shall furnish City with a new certificate and applicable endorsements for such policy(ies). In the event any policy is due to expire during the work to be performed for City, SUBRECIPIENT shall provide a new certificate, and applicable endorsements, evidencing renewal of such policy not less than 15 calendar days prior to the expiration date of the expiring policy. 
The General Liability and Automobile Liability insurance policies shall be written on an occurrence form and shall name City, its elected officials, officers, officials, employees, agents and volunteers as an additional insured. Such policy(ies) of insurance shall be endorsed so SUBRECIPIENT's insurance shall be primary and no contribution shall be required of City, its elected officials, officers, officials, employees, agents and volunteers. The coverage shall contain no special limitations on the scope of protection afforded to City, its elected officials, officers, officials, employees, agents or volunteers. The Workers' Compensation insurance policy shall contain a waiver of subrogation as to City, its elected officials, officers, officials, employees, agents and volunteers. 
If the Professional Liability (Errors and Omissions) insurance policy is written on a claims-made form: 
1. 
The retroactive date must be shown, and must be before the effective date of the Agreement or the commencement of work by SUBRECIPIENT. 

2. 
Insurance must be maintained and evidence of insurance must be provided for at least 5 years after any expiration or termination of the Agreement or, in the 


alternative, the policy shall be endorsed to provide not less than a 5-year discovery period. 
3. 
If coverage is canceled or non-renewed, and not replaced with another claims made policy form with a retroactive date prior to the effective date of the Agreement or the commencement of work by SUBRECIPIENT, SUBRECIPIENT must purchaseextended reporting coverage for a minimum of 5 years following the expiration or termination of the Agreement. 

4. 
A copy of the claims reporting requirements must be submitted to City for review. 


These requirements shall survive expiration or termination of the Agreement. 
SUBRECIPIENT shall furnish City with all certificate(s) and applicable endorsements effecting coverage required hereunder. All certificates and applicable endorsements are to be received by City and approved by City Manager or his/her designee prior to City's execution of the Agreement and before work commences. Upon request of City, SUBRECIPIENT shall immediately furnish City with a complete copy of any insurance policy required under this Agreement, including all endorsements, with said copycertified by the underwriter to be a true and correct copy of the original policy. This requirement shall survive expiration or termination of this Agreement. 
If at any time during the life of this Agreement or any extension, SUBRECIPIENT or any of its subconsultants fail to maintain any required insurance in full force and effect, all work under this Agreement shall be discontinued immediately, and all payments due or that become due to SUBRECIPIENT shall be withheld until notice is received by City that the required insurance has been restored to full force and effect and that the premiums therefore have been paid for a period satisfactory to City. Any failure to maintain the required insurance shall be sufficient cause for City to terminate this Agreement. No action taken by City hereunder shall in any way relieve SUBRECIPIENT of its responsibilities under this Agreement. 
The fact that insurance is obtained by SUBRECIPIENT shall not be deemed to release or diminish the liability of SUBRECIPIENT, including, without limitation, liability under the indemnity provisions of this Agreement. The duty to indemnify City and its elected officials, officers, officials, employees, agents and volunteers shall apply to all claims and liability regardless of whether any insurance policies are applicable. The policy limits do not act as a limitation upon the amount of indemnification to be provided by SUBRECIPIENT. Approval or purchase of any insurance contracts or policies shall in no way relieve from liability nor limit the liability of SUBRECIPIENT, its principals, officers, employees, agents, persons under the supervision of SUBRECIPIENT,vendors, suppliers, invitees, consultants, subconsultants, or anyone employed directly or indirectly by any of them. 
If SUBRECIPIENT should subcontract all or any portion of the services to be performed under this Agreement, SUBRECIPIENT shall require each subconsultant to provideinsurance protection in favor of City, its elected officials, officers, officials, employees, agents and volunteers in accordance with the terms of each of the precedingparagraphs, except that the subconsultants' certificates and endorsements shall be on file with SUBRECIPIENT and City prior to the commencement of any work by the subconsultant. 
The SUBRECIPIENT shall comply with the bonding and insurance requirements of 24 CFR 84.31 and 84.48, Bonding and Insurance. 
F. Recognition 
The SUBRECIPIENT shall ensure recognition of the role of the CITY in providing services through this Agreement. All activities, facilities and items utilized pursuant to this Agreement shall be prominently labeled as to funding source. The SUBRECIPIENT will include a reference to the support provided herein in publications made possible with funds made available under this Agreement. 
G. Amendments 
The CITY or SUBRECIPIENT may amend this Agreement at any time provided that such amendments make specific reference to this Agreement, and are executed in writing, signed by a duly authorized representative of each organization, and approved by the CITY's governing body. Such amendments shall not invalidate this Agreement, nor relieve or release the CITY or SUBRECIPIENT from its obligations under this Agreement. 
The CITY may, in its discretion, amend this Agreement to conform with Federal, state or local governmental guidelines, policies and available funding amounts, or for other reasons. If such amendments result in a change in the funding, the scope of services, or schedule of the activities to be undertaken as part of this Agreement, such modifications will be incorporated only by written amendment signed by both CITY and SUBRECIPIENT. 
H. Suspension or Termination 
In accordance with 24 CFR 85.43, the CITY may suspend or terminate this Agreement if the SUBRECIPIENT materially fails to comply with any terms of this Agreement, which include, but are not limited to the following: 
1. 
Failure to comply with any of the rules, regulations or provisions referred to herein, or such statutes, regulations, executive orders, and HUD guidelines, policies or directives as may become applicable at any time; 

2. 
Failure, for any reason, of the SUBRECIPIENT to fulfill in a timely and propermanner its obligations under this Agreement; 

3. 
Ineffective or improper use of funds provided under this Agreement; or 

4. 
Submission by the SUBRECIPIENT to the CITY reports that are incorrect or 


incomplete in any material respect. 
In accordance with 24 CFR 85.44, this Agreement may also be terminated for convenience by either the CITY or the SUBRECIPIENT, in whole or in part, by setting forth the reasons for such termination, the effective date, and, in the case of partial termination, the portion to be terminated. However, if in the case of a partial termination, the CITY determines that the remaining portion of the award will not accomplish the purpose for which the award was made, the CITY may terminate the award in its entirety. 


SECTION 9: ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS 
A. Financial Management 
1. Accounting Standards 
The SUBRECIPIENT agrees to comply with 24 CFR 84.21-28 and agrees to adhere to the accounting principles and procedures required therein, utilize adequate internal controls, and maintain necessary source documentation for all costs incurred. 
2. 
Cost Principles 

The SUBRECIPIENT shall administer its program in conformance with 2 CFR 200 ­"Uniform Administrative Requirements" as applicable. These principles shall be applied for all costs incurred whether charged on a direct or indirect basis. 

3. 
Program Income 


The SUBRECIPIENT shall retain any and all program income resulting from fees charged for the provision of service, and any interest accrued on these funds. Program income shall be expended in support of the services provided by the SUBRECIPIENT. All provisions of this agreement apply equally to the expenditure of that portion of program income that is attributable to the CITY'S CDBG allocation received by SUBRECIPIENT. 
B. Documentation and Record Keeping 
1. Record Maintenance 
The SUBRECIPIENT shall maintain all records required by the Federal regulations specified in 24 CFR 570.506, that are pertinent to the activities to be funded under this Agreement. Such records shall include but not be limited to: 
a. 
Records providing a full description of each activity undertaken; 

b. 
Records demonstrating that each activity undertaken meets one of the National Objectives of the CDBG program; 

c. 
Records required to determine the eligibility of activities undertaken and clients served; 

d. 
Records required to document the acquisition, improvement, use or disposition of real property acquired or improved with CDBG assistance; 

e. 
Records documenting compliance with the fair housing and equal opportunity components of the CDBG program; 

f. 
Financial records as required by 24 CFR 570.502, and 24 CFR 84.21-28; and 

g. 
Other records necessary to document compliance with Subpart K of 24 CFR Part 570. 


2. Retention 
The SUBRECIPIENT shall retain all financial records, supporting documents,statistical records, and all other records pertinent to the Agreement for a period of five (5) years. The retention period begins on the date of the submission of the CITY's annual performance and evaluation report to HUD in which the activities assisted under the Agreement are reported on for the final time. Notwithstanding the above, if there is litigation, claims, audits, negotiations or other actions that involve any of the records cited and that have started before the expiration of the five-year period, then such records must be retained until completion of the actions and resolution of all issues, or the expiration of the five-year period, whichever occurs later. 
3. Client Data 
The SUBRECIPIENT shall maintain client data demonstrating client eligibility for services provided. Such data shall include, but not be limited to, client name,address, income level or other basis for determining eligibility, and description of service provided. Such information shall be made available to CITY monitors or their designees for review upon request. 
4. 
Disclosure 

The SUBRECIPIENT understands that client information collected under this contract is private and the use or disclosure of such information, when not directly connected with the administration of the CITY's or SUBRECIPIENT's responsibilities with respect to services provided under this contract, is prohibited by State and Federal law unless written consent is obtained from such person receiving service and, in the case of a minor, that of a responsible parenUguardian. 

5. 
Close-outs 


The SUBRECIPIENT's obligation to the CITY shall not end until all close-out requirements are completed. Activities during this close-out period shall include, but are not limited to: making final payments, disposing of program assets (including the return of all unused materials, equipment, unspent cash advances, program income balances, and accounts receivable to the CITY), and determining the custodianship of records. Notwithstanding the foregoing, but consistent with Section 3, the terms of this Agreement shall remain in effect during any period that the SUBRECIPIENT has control over CDBG funds, including program income. 
6. Audits & Inspections 
All SUBRECIPIENT records with respect to any matters covered by this Agreement shall be made available to the CITY, grantor agency, and the Comptroller General of the United States or any of their authorized representatives, at any time during normal business hours, as often as deemed necessary, to audit, examine, and make excerpts or transcripts of all relevant data. Any deficiencies noted in audit reports must be fully cleared by the SUBRECIPIENT within 30 days after receipt by the SUBRECIPIENT. Failure of the SUBRECIPIENT to comply with the above audit requirements will constitute a violation of this contract and may result in the withholding of future payments. The SUBRECIPIENT hereby agrees to have an annual agency audit conducted in accordance with current Grantee policyconcerning SUBRECIPIENT audits and 2 C.F.R. 200. 

C. Payment Procedures and Reporting 
1. Program Income 
The SUBRECIPIENT shall report quarterly all program income (as defined at 24 
C.F.R. 570.500(a)) generated by activities carried out with CDBG funds made available under this Agreement. The use of program income by the SUBRECIPIENT shall comply with the requirements set forth at 24 C.F.R. 570.504. By way of further limitations, the SUBRECIPIENT may use such income during the Agreement period for activities permitted under this Agreement and shall reduce requests for additional funds by the amount of any such program income balance on hand. All unexpended program income shall be returned to the Grantee at the end of the Agreement period. Any interest earned on cash advances from the U.S. Treasury and from funds held in a revolving fund account is not program income and shall be remitted promptly to the Grantee. 
2. 
Indirect Costs 

If indirect costs are charged, the SUBRECIPIENT will develop an indirect cost allocation plan for determining the appropriate SUBRECIPIENT'S share of administrative costs and shall submit such plan to the Grantee for approval, in a form specified by the Grantee. 

3. 
Payment Procedures 

The CITY will pay to the SUBRECIPIENT funds available under this Agreement based upon information submitted by the SUBRECIPIENT and consistent with any approved budget and CITY policy concerning payments. Monthly payments will be made for eligible expenses actually incurred by the SUBRECIPIENT, and not to exceed one-twelfth of the contracted amount. 

4. 
Progress Reports 


The SUBRECIPIENT shall submit to the CITY, quarterly performance reports of the client demographics in the form, content, and frequency as required by the CITY. 
D. Procurement 
1. Compliance 
The SUBRECIPIENT shall establish and comply with current CITY policy concerning the purchase of equipment and shall maintain inventory records of all non­expendable personal property as defined by such policy as may be procured with funds provided herein. All program assets (unexpended program income, property, equipment, etc.) shall revert to the SUBRECIPIENT upon termination of this Agreement. 
2. 0MB Standards 
Unless specified otherwise within this agreement, the SUBRECIPIENT shall procure all materials, property, or services in accordance with the requirements of 24 CFR 84.40-48. 
3. Travel 
SUBRECIPIENT shall obtain written approval from the Grantee for any travel outside the metropolitan area with funds provided under this Agreement. 

E. Use and Reversion of Assets 
The use and disposition of real property and equipment under this Agreement shall be in compliance with the requirements of 24 CFR Part 84 and 24 CFR 570.502, 570.503, and 570.504, as applicable, which include but are not limited to the following: 
1. 
The SUBRECIPIENT shall transfer to the CITY any CDBG funds on hand and any accounts receivable attributable to the use of funds under this Agreement at the time of expiration, cancellation, or termination. 

2. 
Real property under the SUBRECIPIENT's control that was acquired or improved, in whole or in part, with funds under this Agreement in excess of $25,000 shall be used to meet one of the CDBG National Objectives pursuant to 24 CFR 570.208 until five 

(5) years after expiration of this Agreement. If the SUBRECIPIENT fails to use CDBG-assisted real property in a manner that meets a CDBG National Objective for the prescribed period of time, the SUBRECIPIENT shall pay the CITY an amount equal to the current fair market value of the property less any portion of the value attributable to expenditures of non-CDBG funds for acquisition of, or improvement to, the property. Such payment shall constitute program income to the CITY. The SUBRECIPIENT may retain real property acquired or improved under this Agreement after the expiration of the five-year period. 

3. 
In all cases in which equipment acquired, in whole or in part, with funds under this Agreement is sold, the proceeds shall be program income, prorated to reflect the extent to that funds received under this Agreement were used to acquire the equipment. Equipment not needed by the SUBRECIPIENT for activities under this Agreement shall be sold after compensating the CITY, an amount equal to the current fair market value of the equipment less the percentage of non-CDBG funds used to acquire the equipment. 


SECTION 10: PERSONNEL & PARTICIPANT CONDITIONS 
A. Civil Rights 
1. Compliance 
The SUBRECIPIENT agrees to comply with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 as amended, Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968 as amended, Section 104(b) and Section 109 of Title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 as amended, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, Executive Order 11063 
as amended by Executive Order 12259, and Executive Order 11246 as amended by Executive Orders 11375, 11478, 12107 and 12086. 
2. 
Nondiscrimination 

The SUBRECIPIENT agrees to comply with the non-discrimination in employment and contracting opportunities laws, regulations, and executive orders referenced in 24 CFR 570.607, as revised by Executive Order 13279 and later amended in Executive Order 13559. The applicable non-discrimination provisions in Section 109 of the Housing and Community Development Act are applicable. 

3. 
Section 504 of Rehabilitation Act of 1973 

The SUBRECIPIENT agrees to comply with all Federal regulations issued pursuant to compliance with Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794), which prohibits discrimination against the individuals with disabilities or handicaps in any Federally assisted program. The Grantee shall provide the SUBRECIPIENT with any guidelines necessary for compliance with that portion of the regulations in force during the term of this Agreement. 

4. 
Limited English Proficiency 


Contractor shall comply with and make good faith and reasonable efforts to carry out the purposes of Executive Order 12166 relating to "Improving Access to Services by Persons with Limited English Proficiency ("LEP"). 

B. Affirmative Action 
1. 
Approved Plan 

The SUBRECIPIENT agrees that it shall be committed to carry out an Affirmative Action Program in keeping with the principles as provided in President's Executive Order 11246 of September 24, 1966. The Grantee shall provide Affirmative Action guidelines to the SUBRECIPIENT to assist in the formulation of such program. The SUBRECIPIENT shall submit a plan for an Affirmative Action Program for approval prior to the award of funds. 

2. 
Women-and Minority-Owned Businesses 


The SUBRECIPIENT will use its best efforts to afford small businesses, minority business enterprises, and women's business enterprises the maximum practicable opportunity to participate in the performance of this contract. As used in this contract, the terms "small business" means a business that meets the criteria set forth in section 3(a) of the Small Business Act, as amended (15 U.S.C. 632), and "minority and women's business enterprise" means a business at least fifty-one (51) percent owned and controlled by minority group members or women. For the purpose of this definition, "minority group members" are Afro-Americans, Spanish­speaking, Spanish surnamed or Spanish-heritage Americans, Asian-Americans, and American Indians. The SUBRECIPIENT may rely on written representations by businesses regarding their status as minority and female business enterprises in lieu of an independent investigation. 
3. Access to Records 
The SUBRECIPIENT shall furnish and cause each of its subcontractors to furnish all information and reports required hereunder and will permit access to its books, records and accounts by the CITY, HUD or its agent, or other authorized Federal officials for purposes of investigation to ascertain compliance with the rules, regulations and provisions stated herein. 
4. Notifications 
The SUBRECIPIENT will send to each labor union or representative of workers with which it has a collective bargaining agreement or other contract or understanding, a notice, to be provided by the agency contracting officer, advising the labor union or worker's representative of the SUBRECIPIENT's commitments hereunder, and shall post copies of the notice in conspicuous places available to employees and applicants for employment. 
5. 
Equal Employment Opportunity and Affirmative Action Statement 

The SUBRECIPIENT will, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by or on behalf of the SUBRECIPIENT, state that it is an Equal Opportunity or Affirmative Action employer. 

6. 
Subcontract Provisions 


The SUBRECIPIENT will include the provisions of Section 10 A, Civil Rights, and Section 10 B, Affirmative Action, in every subcontract or purchase order, specifically or by reference, so that such provisions will be binding upon each of its own subcontractors. 
C. Employment Restrictions 
1. 
Prohibited Activity 

The SUBRECIPIENT is prohibited from using funds provided herein or personnel employed in the administration of the program for, political activities, inherently religious activities, lobbying, political patronage and/or nepotism activities. 

2. 
Labor Standards 


The SUBRECIPIENT agrees to comply with the requirements of the Secretary of Labor in accordance with the Davis-Bacon Act as amended, the provisions of Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act (40 U.S.C. 327 et seq.) and all other applicable Federal, state and local laws and regulations pertaining to labor standards insofar as those acts apply to the performance of this Agreement. The SUBRECIPIENT agrees to comply with the Copeland Anti-Kick Back Act (18 U.S.C. 874 et seq.) and it's implementing regulations of the U.S. Department of Labor at 29 CFR Part 5. The SUBRECIPIENT shall maintain documentation that demonstrates compliance with hour and wage requirements of this part. Such documentation shall be made available to the CITY for review upon request. 
3. "Section 3" Clause 
a. Compliance 
Compliance with the provIsIons 
of Section 3 of the HUD Act of 1968, as amended, and as implemented by the regulations set forth in 24 CFR Part 75, and all applicable rules and orders issued hereunder prior to the execution of this contract, shall be a condition of the Federal financial assistance provided under this contract and binding upon the CITY, the SUBRECIPIENT. Failure to fulfill these requirements shall subjeci the CITY, the SUBRECIPIENT and any of the SUBRECIPIENT's subcontractors, their successors and assigns, to those sanctions specified by the Agreement through which Federal assistance is provided. The SUBRECIPIENT certifies and agrees that no contractual or other disability exists that would prevent compliance with these requirements. 
The SUBRECIPIENT further agrees to comply with these "Section 3" requirements and to include the following language in all subcontracts executed under this Agreement: 
"The work to be performed under this Agreement is a project assisted under a program providing direct Federal financial assistance from HUD and is subject to the requirements of Section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1701u). Section 3 requires that to the greatest extent feasible opportunities for training and employment be given to low-and very low-income residents of the project area, and that contracts for work in connection with the project be awarded to business concerns that provide economic opportunities for low-and very low-income persons residing in the metropolitan area in which the project is located." 
The SUBRECIPIENT certifies and agrees that no contractual or other legal incapacity exists that would prevent compliance with these requirements. 
b. Notifications 
The SUBRECIPIENT agrees to send to each labor organization or representative of workers with which it has a collective bargaining agreement or other contract or understanding, if any, a notice advising said labor organization or worker's representative of its commitments under this Section 3 clause and shall post copies of the notice in conspicuous places available to employees and applicants for employment or training. 
c. Subcontracts 
The SUBRECIPIENT will include this Section 3 clause in every subcontract and will take appropriate action pursuant to the subcontract upon a finding that the subcontractor is in violation of regulations issued by the grantor agency. The SUBRECIPIENT will not subcontract with any entity where it has notice or knowledge that the latter has been found in violation of regulations under 24 CFR Part 75 and will not let any subcontract unless the entity has first provided it with a preliminary statement of ability to comply with the requirements of these regulations. 

D. Conduct 
1. 
Assignability 

The SUBRECIPIENT shall not assign or transfer any interest in this Agreement without the prior written consent of the CITY thereto; provided, however, that claims for money due or to become due to the SUBRECIPIENT from the CITY under this contract may be assigned to a bank, trust company, or other financial institution without such approval. Notice of any such assignment or transfer shall be furnished promptly to the CITY. 

2. 
Subcontracts 


a. Approvals 
The SUBRECIPIENT shall not enter into any subcontracts with any agency or individual in the performance of this contract without the written consent of the CITY prior to the execution of such agreement. 
b. Monitoring 
The SUBRECIPIENT will monitor all subcontracted services on a regular basis to assure contract compliance. Results of monitoring efforts shall be summarized in written reports and supported with documented evidence of follow-up actions taken to correct areas of noncompliance. 
c. Content 
The SUBRECIPIENT shall cause all of the prov1s1ons of this contract in its entirety to be included in and made a part of any subcontract executed in the performance of this Agreement. 
d. Selection Process 
The SUBRECIPIENT shall undertake to insure that all subcontracts let in the performance of this Agreement shall be awarded on a fair and open competition basis in accordance with applicable procurement requirements. Executed copies of all subcontracts shall be forwarded to the CITY along with documentation concerning the selection process. 
3. 
Hatch Act 

The SUBRECIPIENT agrees that no funds provided, nor personnel employed under this Agreement, shall be in any way or to any extent engaged in the conduct of political activities in violation of Chapter 15 of Title V of the U.S.C. 

4. 
Conflict of Interest 


The SUBRECIPIENT agrees to abide by the provisions of 24 CFR 84.42 and 570.611, which include, but are not limited to the following: 
a. 
The SUBRECIPIENT shall maintain a written code or standards of conduct that shall govern the performance of its officers, employees or agents engaged in the award and administration of contracts supported by Federal funds. 

b. 
No employee, officer or agent of the SUBRECIPIENT shall participate in the selection, the award, or administration of, a contract supported by Federal funds if a conflict of interest, real or apparent, would be involved. 

c. 
No covered persons who exercise or have exercised any functions or responsibilities with respect to CDBG-assisted activities, or who are in a position to participate in a decision-making process or gain inside information with regard to such activities, may obtain a financial interest in any contract, or have a financial interest in any contract, subcontract, or agreement with respect to the CDBG-assisted activity, or with respect to the proceeds from the CDBG-assisted activity, either for themselves or those with whom they have business or immediate family ties, during their tenure or for a period of one (1) yearthereafter. For purposes of this paragraph, a "covered person" includes any person who is an employee, agent, consultant, officer, or elected or appointedofficial of the CITY, the SUBRECIPIENT, or any designated public agency. 


5. Lobbying 
The SUBRECIPIENT hereby certifies that: 
a. 
No Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid, by or on behalf of it, to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employeeof any agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress in connection with the awarding of any Federal contract, the making of any Federal grant, the making of any Federal loan, the entering into of any cooperative agreement, and the extension,continuation, renewal, amendment, or modification of any Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement; 

b. 
If any funds other than Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress in connection with this Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement, it will complete and submit Standard Form-LLL, "Disclosure Form to Report Lobbying," in accordance with its instructions; and 

c. 
It will require that the language of paragraph 5(d) of this section be included in the award documents for all sub-awards at all tiers and that all SUBRECIPIENTS shall certify and disclose accordingly: 

d. 
Lobbying Certification 


"This certification is a material representation of fact upon which reliance was placed when this transaction was made or entered into. Submission of this certification is a prerequisite for making or entering into this transaction imposed by section 1352, title 31, U.S.C. Any person who fails to file the requiredcertification shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $10,000 and not more than $100,000 for each such failure." 

6. 
Copyright 

If this contract results in any copyrightable material or inventions, the CITY and/or grantor agency reserves the right to royalty-free, non-exclusive and irrevocable license to reproduce, publish or otherwise use and to authorize others to use, the work or materials for governmental purposes. 

7. 
Religious Activities 


The SUBRECIPIENT agrees that funds provided under this Agreement will not be utilized for inherently religious activities prohibited by 24 CFR 570.2000), such as worship, religious instruction, or proselytization. 
SECTION 11: ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS 
The SUBRECIPIENT's program has been determined to be exempt from the requirement of federal law regarding environmental review. The SUBRECIPIENT is encouraged to incorporate sustainable practices into their organization's business model. 
SECTION 12: SEVERABILITY 
If any provision of this Agreement is held invalid, the remainder of the Agreement shall not be affected thereby and all other parts of this Agreement shall nevertheless be in full force and effect. 
SECTION 13: SECTION HEADINGS AND SUBHEADINGS 
The section headings and subheadings contained in this Agreement are included for convenience only and shall not limit or otherwise affect the terms of this Agreement. 
SECTION 14: WAIVER 
The CITY's failure to act with respect to a breach by the SUBRECIPIENT does not waive its right to act with respect to subsequent or similar breaches. The failure of the CITY to exercise or enforce any right or provision shall not constitute a waiver of such right or provision. 
SECTION 15: ENTIRE AGREEMENT 
This agreement constitutes the entire agreement between the CITY and the SUBRECIPIENT for the use of funds received under this Agreement and it supersedes all prior or contemporaneous communications and proposals, whether electronic, oral, or written between the CITY and the SUBRECIPIENT with respect to this Agreement. 


SECTION 16: DATE OF AGREEMENT 
The date of this Agreement shall be the date it shall have been signed by adulyauthorized representative of City. 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have executed this Agreement asof the date set opposite their names. 
Home Start, Inc. SUBRECIPIENT 
Datee. By ·A. . . /).­
.edi-Baese,Chief Executive Officer 

Federal Employer I.D. Number 
CITY OF LA MESA, 
A Municipal Corporation 
Date:q,Jz3/2! 
Date:q/z.3/'l{ 
Date:e. 




EXHIBIT A 
SCOPE OF SERVICES: La Mesa Housing Stability-Mortgage Assistance and Flex Funds: 

Description of Program: 
Home Start, Inc. will operate a Housing Stability Program to assist La Mesa homeowners, renters, and other households that can be diverted from homelessness who have been directly impacted by a loss of income due to the COVID-19 public health emergency. Assistance will be provided in the form of mortgage or rental payments directly to lenders and landlords, to help residents avoid default or eviction, and flexible funds to assist households with other urgent needs including utilities, food cards, transportation, rental deposits, and other expenses that can divert them from homelessness. 
Home Start, Inc. will supp011 households whose income falls below 80 percent of the local AMI and are at 
risk of losing their housing by providing up to 2 months of m011gage or rental assistance and intensive case 
management. Flexible funding will be used strategically to divert households from homelessness whenever possible and assist with long term stabilization in permanent housing. Horne Start, Inc. will leverage our expertise and existing homelessness prevention funds from the County to ensure we are able to begin operations immediately and have well-trained and knowledgeable staff that can administer the program. Households will be limited to a maximum of$5,000 of financial assistance per calendar year. When necessary, Horne Start, Inc. will also provide mediation with lenders and landlords and connect clients to 
other long-term resources to promote housing stability. All households will be. educated on the short-term nature of the funding and work with case management to develop a strength-based housing stability plan. Referrals and linkage will be made to other assistance programs to ensure clients maintain housing. 
Funds will be used to make payments directly to mortgage lenders, landlords, utility companies, or other vendors. Clients will be required to provide income certification, past due notices, and proof of present address ( e.g., rent receipt, lease or deed, property tax bill). Intensive housing stability case management will be provided to assist clients with increasing income and other resources to provide stabilization and financial security. Clients will be educated on their rights and the most up-to-date local, state, and federal laws. Follow up services will be provided to all clients including referrals to internal and external resources. 
Home Start, Inc. will offer the following services: 
• 
Maintain staff to serve the needs of the program. 

• 
Provide assistance in English, Spanish, and Arabic. 

• 
Maintain a webpage with the application link and all program information including instructional videos of the application process in English, Spanish, and Arabic. 

• 
Create a housing stability plan and assess other emergency needs. 

• 
Issue mortgage and rental payments directly to lenders and landlords. 

• 
Provide additional homelessness diversion services when necessary. 

• 
Provide linkage and referrals to other resources throughout the County to assist with housing stability. 


• 
Education on most up-to-date local, state, and federal laws and homeowner's rights. 

• 
Maintain complete records of applications and documents submitted; provide all records to the City in electronic fo1mat. 

• 
Provide the City with weekly updates regarding the number of applications received, applications processed, and grant amounts awarded. 

• 
Coordinate Lead Based paint inspection if required. 


Application Process: 
1. 
The Application Period shall be open as assistance is available throughout the year. The program shall be marketed to La Mesa residents by Home Strut, Inc. And included in the 211 resource database. 

2. 
Applications will be accepted on a first-come, first-served basis by online submission and in-person at Home Start, Inc. 's office in El Cajon. All applications will be date and time stamped to ensure applications are processed on a first-come, first served basis. Home Start, Inc. will request that all supporting documents are submitted with the application or within three days of submission. 

3. 
Home Strut, Inc. will maintain a complete database of applications received including the date and time applications were submitted. This database will be made available to the City for review along with the final database for documentation purposes. 

4. 
Home Start, Inc. will work with residents to complete applications in the order received; including providing help to residents that need assistance submitting supporting documentation. 


Documents included: 
• 
Assistance application with demographic information included 

• 
Documentation that income has been impacted by COVID: unemployment, furlough letter, paystubs that indicate a decrease in hours, bank statements, medical documents, etc. 

• 
Past due mortgage or rental notice detailing months and amounts 

• 
Copy of ID 

• 
W-9 from mortgage lender or landlord 



COST PROPOSAL 
Housing Stability Case Manager 
Supervision Benefits at 26% 
Telephone, Fax, Internet -$70/month 
Travel/Mileage -$SO/month Mortgage Assistance Flex funds Equipment-Laptops, etc. Indirect Costs-10%-Administrative Overhead (Reduced from Federally 
Approved Indirect Rate of 18. 7%) 
Total 
$41,600  
$5,000 $10,816 $ 840 $ 600  
$200,000 $43,544 $2,000.00 $33,800 $338,000  





