AGREEMENT 
BETWEEN THE CITY OF EL CAJON AND 
Home Start, Inc. 
I.+ . , 2022, by and 
THIS AGREEMENT is made and entered into this ___ day of 
between the CITY OF EL CAJON, a charter city and municipal corporation, h r nafter referred to as "City," and Home Start, Inc., a nonprofit organization under the laws of the State of Ca 1fornia, hereinafter referred to as "Subrecipient";
WHEREAS, there exists a need within the City of El Cajon to provide a variety of services, including housing, recreational, educational, and child care services and developmental programs, in order to prevent,prepare for and respond to the coronavirus pandemic; and 
WHEREAS, the Subrecipient has expressed a desire and has the expertise and experience to operate the program entitled "CV-Outreach Support Services Program" in El Cajon; and 
WHEREAS, the City has entered into a contract with the United States of America through its Department of Housing and Urban Development, hereinafter called HUD, to execute the City's Community Development Block Grant, hereinafter called CDBG, program under the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended, hereinafter called the "Act"; and 
WHEREAS, the City anticipates receiving one-time Cares Act Community Development Block Grant ("CDBG-CV") entitlement grant funds from HUD for FY 2019-20 in the amount of $1,811,963, which is intended to be used to prevent, prepare for, and respond to the impacts of the coronavirus on residents through efforts such as the CV-Outreach Support Services Program. 
NOW, THEREFORE, IT IS HEREBY MUTUALLY AGREED by and between the parties hereto as follows: 
1. 
City Review: 

The City reserves the right to review and approve actions and decisions taken by the Subrecipient with respect to the operation of the CV-Outreach Support Services Program for compliance with all applicable regulations. 

2. 
Subrecipient Status: 

The City recognizes the Subrecipient as an independent nonprofit organization and agrees to cooperate in protecting its image as a politically neutral organization. 

3. 
Service Area: 

The Service area is City-wide in the City of El Cajon. 

4. 
Scope of Services: 

The Subrecipient shall perform all services described in the project description and Scope of Work and Budgetset forth as Exhibit "A" to this Agreement, a copy of which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by this reference. 

5. 
Time of Performance: 

Said services of the Subrecipient are to commence no sooner than June 1, 2022 and shall be completed no later than March 31, 2023. 

6. 
Compensation and Method of Payment: 


The City shall reimburse the Subrecipient for allowable costs incurred under the scope of the Agreement and applicable Federal regulations, which have not been paid for or reimbursed in any other manner byany other Agency or private source of funding. The total of all reimbursements shall not exceed 
One Hundred and Fifty-Five Thousand Dollars and no/100s dollars (155000). 
7. Compliance with Laws and Assurances: 
The Subrecipient hereby assures and certifies that it has complied with and will continue to comply with the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, hereinafter called the Act, and all current and future applicable federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, regulations, policies, guidelines, and requirements as they relate to acceptance and use of Federal funds for this federally assisted program. This Agreement is subject to all such laws, ordinances, regulations, policies, guidelines, and requirements including without limitation, the Act, Title 2, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 200; Title 24, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 570; Title 29 Code of Federal Regulations, Parts 3 and 5; Title 24 Code of Federal Regulations Part 70 and Public Law 87-581. 
8. Records Retention: 
The Subrecipient shall maintain and retain all financial records, supporting documents, statistical records and all other records pertaining to the use of the funds provided under this Agreement for a period of four 
(4) 
years at a minimum, and in the event of litigation, claim or audit, the records shall be retained until all litigation, claims, and audit findings involving the records have been fully resolved. Records for non­expendable property acquired with Federal funds provided under this Agreement shall be retained for four 

(4) 
years after the final disposition of such property. 


9. 
Monitoring:

The City will conduct periodic program monitoring reviews. These reviews will focus on the extent to which the planned program has been implemented, measurable goals achieved, effectiveness of programmanagement, and impact of the program. Authorized representatives of the City and HUD shall have the right of access to all activities and facilities operated by the Subrecipient under this Agreement. Facilities include all files, records, and other documents related to the performance of this Agreement. Activities include attendance at staff, board of directors, advisory committee, and advisory board meetings and inspection by City and HUD representatives, and to ensure that its employees and board members furnish such information, as in the judgment of City and HUD representatives, may be relevant to the question of compliance with contractual conditions and HUD directives, or the effectiveness, legality and achievements of the program. 

10. 
Program Reporting: 


The Subrecipient agrees to prepare and submit financial, program progress, evaluations, and other reports as required by HUD or the City. The Subrecipient shall maintain such program, property, personnel, financial and other records and accounts as are considered necessary by HUD or the City to assure proper accounting for all Contract funds. Sub-recipient shall submit all financial requirements in Exhibit "B" (Request for Payment forms). All of the Subrecipient's records, with the exception of confidential client information, shall be made available to representatives of the City and the appropriate Federal agencies. The Subrecipient is required to submit data necessary to complete the Annual Subrecipient Performance Report and other federal documents in accordance with HUD regulations and in the format and at the time designated by the City. Subrecipient shall submit a Periodic Performance Report (Exhibit "C") for the reporting period (may be either monthly or quarterly, as agreed to with the City at time of contract execution) by the 10th day of the month following the reporting period. The reports shall include the following information: 
A. Number of individual clients served (individual client may be a person or a household)
B. Race of clients served 
C. Ethnicity of clients served (Hispanic, yes or no -a person may be of any race and be Hispanic) 
D. Number of disabled clients served (as defined by the Social Security Administrative Guidelines) 
E. Whether or not the head of the household is female 
F. Number of clients who are low income (per HUD guidelines) 
G. Whether or not the client is an El Cajon resident. 
H. Number of new clients assisted. 
In addition, a brief narrative must accompany the report (Exhibit "C-2"). The narrative should include (but is not limited to) the following: 
A. Outreach methods used; 
B. Number and disposition of complaints received; and 
C. Progress made toward goals as evidenced in Exhibit "A", or an explanation of lack thereof. 
D. Any other accomplishments or problems/concerns the Agency wishes to report. 
11. Accounting:
The Subrecipient must establish and maintain on a current basis, an adequate accrual and accounting system in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and standards. The City, the Federal Grantor Agency, the Comptroller General of the United States, or any of their duly-authorizedrepresentatives, shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of the Subrecipientwhich directly pertain to the above project for the purpose of audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions. 
12. Audits: 
The Subrecipient is required to arrange for an independent financial and compliance audit annually for each fiscal year Federal funds are received under this contract. Audits must be in compliance with 2 CFR Part 200, Subpart F. (Exhibit "F"). An audit may be conducted by Federal, State, or local funding source agencies as part of the City's audit responsibilities. The Subrecipient shall forward a copy of the independent audit to the City for review within thirty (30) days of its completion. Within thirty (30) days of the submittal of said audit report, the Subrecipient shall provide a written response to all conditions or findings reported in said audit report. The response must examine each condition or finding and explain a proposed resolution, including a schedule for correcting any deficiency. All correction actions related to conditions or findings shall take place within six (6) months after receipt of the audit report. 
The City's authorized representatives shall at all times, have access for the purpose of audit or inspection, to any and all books, documents, papers, records, property and premises of the Subrecipient.Subrecipient staff will cooperate fully with authorized auditors when they conduct audits and examinations of the Subrecipient's program. If indications of misappropriation or misapplication of the funds of this Agreement cause the City to require a special audit, the cost of the audit will be encumbered and deducted from the Subrecipient's CDBG award. Should the special audit confirm misappropriation or misapplication of funds, the Subrecipient shall reimburse the City the amount of the misapplication or misappropriation. In the event the City uses the judicial system to recover misappropriated or misapplied funds, the Subrecipient shall reimburse the City for legal fees and court costs in addition to awards. 
13. Beneficiary Qualification: 
The Subrecipient agrees to guarantee that at least fifty-one percent (51 %) of the beneficiaries of the program identified in Exhibit "A," Scope of Work and Budget, are low and moderate income persons or households. Under the CDBG regulations, the following clienteles are presumed to be low and moderate income persons and can qualify for service regardless of income: abused children, elderly persons, battered spouses, homeless persons, disabled persons, illiterate persons, and migrant farm workers. Beneficiaries qualifying on the basis of income shall have an annual income equal to or less than the current applicable Income Limits. schedule published by HUD for the San Diego MSA, which defines the maximum income for low and moderate income households. The Subrecipient is responsible for obtaining the current applicable HUD Income Limits schedule for each year of the Agreement term identified in Paragraph 6, Time of Performance. The Subrecipient shall retain these forms for three (3) years after conclusion of the Agreement. 
14. 
Assignment: 

This Agreement is not assignable by the Subrecipient without the express prior written consent of the City Council. Consent shall be given at the sole discretion of the City Council. Any attempt by the Subrecipient to assign any performance of the terms of this Agreement shall be null and void and shall constitute a material breach of this Agreement upon which the City may, among other remedies, and without limitation, cancel, terminate, or suspend this Agreement. 

15. 
Termination and Termination Costs: 


This Agreement may be terminated in whole or in part at any time by either party upon giving thirty (30) days written notice to the other party. Agreement must be reached by both parties as to reasons and conditions for termination in compliance with the provisions of Title 2 Code of Federal Regulations Part 
200. The City Manager is hereby empowered to give said notice subject to ratification by the City Council. 
The City may immediately terminate this Agreement upon the termination, suspension, discontinuation, or substantial reduction in CDBG funding for the Contract activity or if for any reason the timely completion of the work under this Agreement is rendered improbable, infeasible, or impossible. If the Subrecipient materially fails to comply with any term of this Agreement, the City may take one of more of the actions provided under 2 CFR Part 200, which includes temporarily withholding cash, disallowing, noncompliance costs, wholly or partially terminating the award, withholding future awards, and other remedies that are legally available. In such event, the Subrecipient shall be compensated for all services rendered and all necessarily incurred costs performed in good faith in accordance with the terms of this Agreement that have been previously reimbursed, to the date of said termination to the extent that CDBG funds are available from HUD. 
16. Program Income: 
A. Program income defined as that money generated from the CDBG funds received herein, and shall be retained by the Subrecipient. 
B. The Subrecipient shall utilize the program income in accordance with Exhibit "A" and all provisions of this Agreement shall apply to the disposition of program income. 
C. Disposition of program income shall be done in accordance with Paragraph 18 of this Agreement. 
17. Reversion of Assets: 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
Upon the expiration or termination of this Agreement, for any reason whatsoever, the Subrecipient shall forthwith transfer to the City, any CDBG funds on hand at the time of such expiration or termination and any accounts receivable attributable to the use of CDBG funds including without limitation, program income. Further, any real property under the control of the Subrecipient that was acquired or improved in whole or in part with CDBG funds in excess of $25,000 shall be: (a) used to meet one of the national objectives set forth in Title 24 CFR 570.208, or any successor statute, until five (5) years after the expiration or termination of the Agreement, or for such longer period of time as determined to be appropriate by the City at its sole discretion; or (b) disposed of in a manner that results in the City's being reimbursed in the amount of the current fair market value of real property less any portion of the value attributable to expenditures of non-CDBG funds for acquisition of, or improvement to such real property. 
Independent Contractor: 
The parties hereto in the performance of this Agreement will be acting in an independent capacity and not as agents, employees, partners, joint venturers, or associates of one another. The employees or agentsof one party shall not be deemed or construed to be the agent or employees of the other party for any purpose whatsoever. 
Insurance: 
The Subrecipient shall neither commence work under this Agreement until it has obtained all insurance required hereunder in a company or companies acceptable to the City nor shall the Subrecipient allow any subcontractor to commence work on a subcontract until all insurance required of the subcontractor has been obtained. 
The Subrecipient shall agree to provide an acceptable certificate of insurance and endorsements evidencing the coverage as specified in El Cajon City Council Policy D-3, Insurance Requirements,which is attached hereto as Exhibit "D" and made a part of this Agreement. All insurance policies shall be subject to approval by CITY as to form and content. 
Subrecipient shall furnish properly executed certificates of insurance to CITY prior to commencement of services under this Agreement. Such certificate shall: 
A. Clearly evidence all coverages required above, including specific evidence of a separateendorsement naming CITY and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and employees as additionally insureds; 
B. Indicate whether coverage provided is on claims-made or occurrence basis; 
C. Provide that such insurance shall not be materially changed, terminated, or allowed to expire
except on thirty (30) days prior written notice, via first class mail to CITY; and 
D. Subrecipient agrees to provide CITY with copies of all required policies upon request. 
Subrecipient shall also maintain Worker's Compensation Insurance (Exhibit "G") with statutory limits, and employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than $2,000,000 per accident. 
No Benefit to Arise to Local Employee: 
No member, officer, or employee of the City, or its designees or agents, no member of the governing body of the City, and no other public official who exercises any functions or responsibilities with respect to the program during his or her tenure or for one year thereafter, shall have any interest, direct or indirect, in this Agreement or in any contract or subcontract, or the proceeds thereof, for work to be performed in connection with the program assisted under this Agreement. 
Certification Regarding Lobbying: 
The Subrecipient certifies to the best of their knowledge and belief, that: 
A. No Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid, by or on behalf of the undersigned, to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress in connection with the awarding of any Federal contract, the making of any cooperative agreement, and the extension, continuation, renewal, amendment, or modification of any Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperativeagreement.
B. If any funds other than Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid to any person for influencing or attempting to influence any officer or employee of any agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or any employee of a Member of Congress in connection with this Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement, the undersigned 
shall complete and submit Standard Form-LLL, "Disclosure Form to Report Lobbying," in accordance with its instructions. 
C. The Subrecipient shall require that the language of this certification be included in the award documents for all sub-awards at all tiers (including subcontractors, sub-grantees, and contracts under grants, loans, and cooperative agreements), and that all Subrecipients shall certify and disclose accordingly. 
22. Conflict of Interest: 
A Subrecipient covenants that neither it, nor any officer or principal of its firm, has or shall acquire any interest, directly or indirectly, which would conflict in any manner with the interests of City or which would in any way hinder Subrecipient's performance of services under this Agreement Subrecipient further covenants that in the performance of this Agreement, no person having any such interest shall be employed by it as an officer, employee, agent or subcontractor without the express written consent of the City Manager. Subrecipient agrees to at all times avoid conflicts of interest or the appearance of any conflicts of interest with the interests of City in the performance of this Agreement (also see Exhibit "E"). 
City understands and acknowledges that Subrecipient is, as of the date of execution of this Agreement, independently involved in the performance of non-related services for other governmental agencies and private parties. Subrecipient is unaware of any stated position of City relative to such projects. Any future position of City on such projects shall not be considered a conflict of interest for purposes of this section. 
23. 
Use of Funds for Entertainment or Gifts: 

The Subrecipient certifies and agrees that it will not use funds provided through this Agreement to pay for entertainment or gifts. 

24. 
Joint Funding: 

For programs in which there are sources of funds in addition to CDBG funds, the Subrecipient shall provide proof of such funding. The City shall not pay for any services provided by the Subrecipient which are funded by other sources. All restrictions and/or requirements provided in this Agreement relative to accounting, budgeting, and reporting applies to the total program regardless of funding sources. 

25. 
Changes in Grant Allocation: 

The City reserves the right to reduce the grant allocation when the City's fiscal monitoring indicates that the Subrecipient's rate of expenditure will result in unspent funds at the end of the program year. Changes in the grant allocation will be done after consultation with the Subrecipient and approval by the City Council. Such changes shall be incorporated into this Agreement by written amendments. 

26. 
Fiscal Limitations: 

The United States of America through HUD may in the future place programmatic or fiscal limitation(s) on CDBG funds not presently anticipated. Accordingly, the City reserves the right to revise this Agreement in order to comply with actions affecting HUD program funding. In the event of funding reduction, the City may reduce the budget of the Agreement as a whole or as to cost category, and may at its sole discretion, limit the Subrecipient's authority to commit and spend funds, and may restrict the Subrecipient's use of both its uncommitted and unspent funds. Where HUD had directed or requested the City to implement a reduction in funding, with respect to funding for this Agreement, the City Manager or his/her designee may act for the City in implementing and effecting such a reduction in revising the Agreement for such purpose. The City Manager or his/her designee may act for the City in suspending the operation of the Agreement for up to sixty (60) days, upon three (3) days written notice to the Subrecipient of his/her intention to so act. In no event, however, shall any revision made by the City effect expenditures and legally binding commitments made by the Subrecipient before it received notice of such revision, provided that such amounts have been committed in good faith and are otherwise allowable and that such commitments are consistent with HUD cash withdrawal guidelines. 

27. 
Purchase and Invoice Deadlines: 


Purchase of equipment or property must be completed before the last three (3) months of the initial performance period and all equipment bills are to be paid before the last two (2) months of this period. No expendable or non-expendable property or equipment is to be purchased during the final three (3) months of the initial performance period unless approved by the City in writing. Invoices for all obligations incurred under this Agreement must be submitted to the Redevelopment and Housing Department within sixty (60)days after the initial performance period termination date or they may not be honored. Exceptions to the preceding limitations require prior written approval by the City. 
Invoices will not be honored unless and until periodic reports are current. 
28. Non-expendable Property: 
A record shall be maintained by the Subrecipient for each item of non-expendable property acquired with CDBG funds. This record shall be provided to the City as well as being available for inspection and audit by the City upon reasonable notice. Non-expendable property means tangible personal property having a useful life of more than one (1) year and an acquisition cost of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more per unit. The Subrecipient shall not purchase or agree to purchase non-expendable property without the prior written approval of the City. Upon completion or early termination of this Agreement, the City reserves the right to determine the final disposition of said non-expendable property acquired for this program and CDBG funds in compliance with applicable laws and regulations. Disposition may include, but is not limited to, the City taking possession of said non-expendable property. 
29. 
Expendable Personal Property: 

Expendable personal property refers to all tangible personal property other than non-expendable personal property. The Subrecipient shall not purchase or agree to purchase expendable personal property with a unit value of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more per unit without the prior written approval of the City. 

30. 
Purchase or Lease of Non-Expendable Property or Equipment: 

The Subrecipient shall obtain three documented bids prior to purchasing or leasing any non-expendable personal property or equipment over one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in unit value. The Subrecipient shall purchase or lease from the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. This inventory shall be provided to the City as well as being available for inspection and audit upon reasonable notice at the request of the City. 

31. 
Travel and Conference Restrictions: 

The Subrecipient certifies and agrees that travel and conference expenses will not be paid for by funds provided through this Agreement. 

32. 
Affirmative Action Policy: 


The Subrecipient shall make a "good faith" effort to ensure that all projects funded wholly or in part by CDBG funds shall provide equal employment and career advancement opportunities for minorities and women. A "good faith" effort includes, but is not limited to, advertising in one or more minority or women's publications; direct solicitations; and requesting assistance from minority and women communityorganizations, contractor groups, local state or federal minority and women business assistance office or other organizations that provide assistance to in the recruitment and placement of minorities and women. In addition, the Subrecipient shall make every effort to employ residents of the area and shall keep a record of the positions that have been created directly or as a result of this program. 
A. Provision of Program Services 
(1) 
The Subrecipient shall not on the ground of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability or familial status exclude any person from participation in, deny any person the benefits of, or subject any person to discrimination under any program or activity funded in whole or in part with CDBG funds. 

(2) 
The Subrecipient shall not under any program or activity funded in whole or in part with CDBG funds, on the ground of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or familial status: 

(a) 
Deny any facilities, services, financial aid or other benefits provided under the program or activity. 

(b) 
Provide any facilities, services, financial aid or other benefits which are different or are provided in a different form from that provided to others under the program or activity. 

(c) 
Subject to segregated or separate treatment in any facility in, or in any manner or process related to receipt of any service or benefit under the program or activity. 

(d) 
Restrict in any way access to, or in the enjoyment of any advantage or privilege enjoyed by others in connection with facilities, services, financial aid, or other benefits under the program or activity. 

(e) 
Treat an individual differently from others in determining whether the individual satisfies any admission, enrollment, eligibility, membership, or other requirement or condition, which the individual must meet in order to be provided any facilities, services, or other benefit provided under the program or activity. 

(f) 
Deny an opportunity to participate in a program or activity as an employee. 



(3) 
The Subrecipient may not utilize criteria or methods of administration which have the effect of subjecting individuals to discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or familial status or have the effect of defeating or substantially impairing accomplishment of the objectives of the program or activity with respect to individuals of a particular race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or familial status. 

(4) 
The Subrecipient, in determining the site or location of housing or facilities provided in whole or in part with CDBG funds, may not make the selections of such site or location which have the effect of excluding individuals from, denying them the benefits of, or subjecting them to discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or familial status or which have the purpose or the effect of defeating or substantially impairing the accomplishment of the objectives of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and amendments thereto. 

(5) 
(a) In administering a program or activity funded in whole or in part with CDBG funds regarding which the Subrecipient has previously discriminated against persons on the grounds of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or familial status, the Subrecipient must take affirmative actions to overcome the effects of prior discrimination. 

(b) 
Even in the absence of such prior discrimination the Subrecipient, in administering a program or activity funded in whole in part with CDBG funds, should take affirmative action to overcome the effects of conditions which would otherwise result in limiting participation by persons of a particular race, color,national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or familial status. Where previous discriminatory practice or usage tends, on the grounds of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or familial status, to exclude individuals from participation in, to deny them the benefits or, or to subject them to discrimination under any program or activity to which CDBG funding applies, the Subrecipient has an obligation to take reasonable action to remove or overcome the consequences of the prior discriminatory practice or usage, and to accomplish the purpose of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and amendments thereto. 

(c) 
The Subrecipient shall not be prohibited by this part from taking any eligible action to ameliorate an imbalance in services or facilities provided to anygeographic area or specific group of persons within its jurisdiction where the purpose of such action is to overcome prior discriminatory practice or usage. 



(6) 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in Sections A(1 )-(5), nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit the Subrecipient from maintaining or constructing separate living facilities or rest room facilities for the different sexes. Furthermore, selection on the basis of sex is not prohibited when institutional or custodial services can properly be performed only by a member of the same sex as the recipients of the services. 


B. Employment Discrimination 
(1) 
The Subrecipient shall not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or familial status. The Subrecipient shall take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are employed, and that employees are treated, during employment, without regard to their race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or familial status. Such action shall include, but not be limited to, the following: employment, upgrading, demotion or transfer, recruitment or recruitment advertising, layoff or termination, rate of pay or other forms of compensation and selection for training including apprenticeship. The Subrecipient agrees to post in a conspicuous place available to employees and applicants for employment, notices setting forth the provisions of this nondiscrimination clause. 

(2) 
The Subrecipient shall, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by or on behalf of the Subrecipient, state that all qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regards to race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or familial status. 

(3) 
The Subrecipient shall send to each labor union or representative of workers with whom it has a collective bargaining agreement or other contract or understanding, a notice to be provided by the City's contracting officers advising the labor union or workers' 


representative of the Subrecipient's commitments under Section 202 of Executive Order No. 11246 of September 24, 1965, and shall post copies of the notice in conspicuous places available to employees and applicants for employment. 
(4) 
The Subrecipient shall comply with all provisions of Executive Order 11246 of September 24, 1965, and of the rules, regulations, and relevant orders of the Secretary of Labor. 

(5) 
The Subrecipient shall furnish to the City all information and reports required by Executive Order No. 11246 of September 24, 1965, and by the related rules, regulations, and orders. 

(6) 
In the event of the Subrecipient's failure to comply with any rules, regulations, or orders required to be complied with pursuant to this Agreement, the City may cancel, terminate, or suspend in whole or in part its performance and the Subrecipient may be declared ineligible for further government contracts in accordance with the procedures authorized in Executive Order No. 11246 of September 24, 1965, or by rule, regulation, or order of the Secretary of Labor, or as otherwise provided by law. 

(7) 
The Subrecipient shall include the provisions of the "Affirmative Action Policy,"Paragraphs B.(1) through (6), above, in every subcontract or purchase order unless exempted by rules, regulations, or order of the Secretary of Labor, issued pursuant to Section 204 of Executive Order No. 11246 of September 24, 1965, so that such provisions will be binding upon each subcontractor or vendor. 

The Subrecipient shall take such action with respect to any subcontract or purchase order as the City may direct as a means of enforcing such provisions including sanctions for noncompliance; provided, however, that in the event the Subrecipient becomes involved in, or is threatened with, litigation with a subcontractor or vendor as a result of such direction by the City, the Subrecipient may request the United States to enter into such litigation to protect the interests of the United States. 

(8) 
The Subrecipient shall not discriminate on the basis of age in violation of any provision of the Age Discrimination Act of 1975 (42 U.S.C. 6101 et seq.) or with respect to anyotherwise qualified disabled individual as provided in Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794). The Subrecipient shall also provide ready access to and use of all CDBG funds assisted buildings to physically disabled persons in compliance with the standards established in the Architectural Barriers Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. 4151 et seq.) and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1992. 


33. Religious Proselytizing or Political Activities: 
The Subrecipient agrees that it will not perform or permit any religious proselytizing or political activities in connection with the performance of this Agreement. Funds under this agreement will be used exclusively for performance of the services required under this Agreement and no funds shall be used to promote any religious or political activities. Further in accordance with 24 CFR 570.200U), et seq., the Subrecipient shall not: 
A. Engage in inherently religious activities, such as worship, religious instruction, or proselytization, as part of the programs or services funded under this part. If an organization conducts such activities, the activities must be offered separately, in time or location, from the programs or services funded under this part, and participation must be voluntary for the beneficiaries of the HUD-funded programs or services; 
B. Use direct CDBG funds to support any inherently religious activities, such as worship, religious instruction, or proselytization;
C. Discriminate against a program beneficiary or prospective program beneficiary on the basis of religion or religious beliefs; 
D. Use CDBG funds for the acquisition, construction, or rehabilitation of structures to the extent that 
those structures are used for inherently religious activities, 
Faith Based Organizations: 
Notwithstanding Paragraph 33 above, if Subrecipient is a Faith Based Organization, Subrecipient agrees to abide by Executive Order 13279, as promulgated at 24 CFR 5.e109, et. seq.
35. Alterations, Encumbrances, Mechanics' Liens: 
The Subrecipient agrees that it will not make, or suffer to be made, any alterations to the CDBG funded improvements, the property or any part thereof, without the prior written consent of the City. The Subrecipient shall keep the property free from any encumbrances or liens arising out of any work 
performed, material furnished, or obligations incurred by the Subrecipient. The Subrecipient agrees to submit performance, and labor and materials bonds on any improvements over $5,000.00. 
36. Notices: 
All notices, memoranda, reports, drafts, and communications shall be served in writing. The notices shall be sent to the following addresses. 
City Subrecipient
Community Development -Housing Home Start, Inc. City of El Cajon Attn: Laura Tancredi-Baese,
Chief Executive Officer 200 Civic Center Way 5005 Texas St., Suite #203 El Cajon, CA 92020 San Diego, CA 921e08 
37. 
Amendments; Variations: 

This writing with attachments embodies the whole of the Agreement of the parties hereto. There are no oral Agreements not contained herein, except as herein provided, addition or variation of the terms of this Agreement shall not be valid unless made in the form of a written amendment to the Agreement formally approved and executed by the City Council. 

38. 
Savings Clause: 

If any provision of this Agreement is found to be invalid, void, or unenforceable, the remaining provisions shall, insofar as reasonably possible, continue in full force in effect without being impaired or invalidated in any way. 

39. 
Exhibit(s):


The Exhibits to this Agreement are an integral part of this Agreement and have each been incorporated herein. 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have caused this Agreement to be executed as of the day and year first written above. 
CITY OF EL CAJON, a charter city and municipal corporation,
Ae
ie,e
Co.o 
CitycierR . 
Graham Mitchell, City Manager 
Home Start, Inc. 
By 
Laura Tancredi-Baese 
Chief Executive Officer 
APPROVED AS TO FORM: 

EXHIBIT "A" 
SCOPE OF WORK AND BUDGET 
Project: CV-Outreach Support Services Program 
Contact Person: Laura Tancredi-Baese, Chief Executive Officer (619-933-9850) 
Statement of Work: The Subrecipient agrees to use the Community Development Block Grant funds allocated by the City for Fiscal Year 2019-2020 to provide the CV-Outreach Support Services Program Program/Projectin the City of El Cajon. 
Section 1 -Work Description:Home Start will provide street-based outreach and host in-reach events to connect individuals and families experiencing homelessness to vital resources such as housing, food, and referrals to programs or trainings to help the unhoused become self-sufficient. Home Start will provide food packs, hygiene kits, clean clothing, laundry detergent, and other basic needs to help prevent the spread of COVID-19. As the Outreach Specialist engages with the population, they will document and track interactions in the Homeless Management Information System (HMIS). 
Section 2 -Records and Reporting 
The Subrecipient shall submit a Periodic Performance Report, which shall become Exhibit "C" hereto, for the previous reporting period. Reporting periods must be monthly due to the short timeframe these funds will likely be spent. Periodic Performance Reports are due by the 10th of the month following the reporting period. These reports shall include the following information: 
A. Number of individual clients served (individual client may be a person or a household)
B. Race of clients served 
C. Ethnicity of clients served (Hispanic, yes or no -a person may be of any race and be Hispanic) 
D. Number of disabled clients served (as defined by the Social Security Administrative Guidelines) 
G. 
Whether or not the head of the household is female 
Number of clients who are low income (per HUD guidelines) 
Whether or not the client is an El Cajon resident. 
H. Number of new clients assisted. 
In addition, a brief narrative (Exhibit "C-2") must accompany the report. Narrative should include (but is not limited to) the following: 
A. Outreach methods used; 
C. 
D. 
Number and disposition of complaints received; and 
Progress made toward goals as evidenced in Exhibit "A", or an explanation of lack thereof. 
Any other accomplishments or problems/concerns the Agency wishes to report. 
Section 3 -Key Program Goals and Timeline 
Home Start, Inc. will provide 300 households individuals with outreach services with both street outreach and in-reach events to connect individuals and families experiencing homelessness to resources like housing, food, and referrals to help them in self-sufficiency Home Start will provide hygiene kits, clean clothing, laundry detergent, and other basic needs. These services will be rendered in the City of El 
Cajon during the period of June 1, 2022 to March 31, 2023. 
Section 4 -Budget 
The City agrees to pay Subrecipient a total sum of One Hundred and Fifty-Five Thousand Dollars and no/100s dollars (155000) to assist in the provision of the above mentioned services. It is further agreed that no funding shall be disbursed unless the Subrecipient is in full compliance with the provisions of this Agreement. The City shall make payment of these funds on a reimbursement basis contingent upon a written request and submittal of receipts or appropriate proof of payment from the Subrecipient. Payments will not be paid unless and until periodic reports are current. Payments may be made on a monthly or quarterly basis, at the Subrecipient's option. 
EXHIBIT "A-2" 
PUBLIC SERVICE PROGRAM BUDGET 
PROJECT TITLE 

I CV-Outreach Support Services Program 
COST COMPONENT CDBGaFUNDS OTHER FUNDS1 IN-KIND TOTAL PROJECT 
PERSONNEL SERVICES 
Salaries (See Schedule B of Aoolication)  54,912  
FrinQe Benefits  14,277  
Total Personnel  69,189  0  0  0  

CONTRACTUAL SERVICES 
Professional Services  
Telephone  2,040 
Utilities  800  
Rent  3200  
Insurance (required)  
Maintenance  
Travel/MileaQe  4,560 
Fingerprinting  
Other (specify) Utilities Other Office Supplies  720  
Total Contractual  11320  0  0  0  

COMMODITIES 
Program Supplies  10, 140  
Printing 
Equipment  332  
Other (specify) Hygiene kits Bus passes/medical appointmentsIndirect Clothing  17,400 16, 800 24, 419 5, 400  
Total Commodities  74,491  0  0  0  

Total Project Budget 
155,000 I 
Use the space below to explain professional services, office equipment expenditures or other cost components that require clarification: 
Note: CDBG paid expenditures must be documented with receipts and or invoices that verify the expense was incurred. To minimize the amount of expense documentation, we strongly suggest the CDBG dollars be used to pay for only a few program costs and not spread out over several line items. If CDBG funds are requested to pay for Personnel Services (salaries), system-generated reports may be submitted, and copies of timecards,paychecks, etc. may be retained in Subrecipient's administrative office, and must be made available for review upon request as set forth in Paragraph 9 of this Agreement. 
Includes Federal and non-Federal funding sources 
EXHIBIT "B" 
FY2019-2020 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT CORONA VIRUS PROGRAM 
REQUEST FOR PAYMENT 
**NOTE: To request Electronic Version of this form, send an e-mail to housing.elca_jon.gov 
This Request for Payment is presented to the City of El Cajon to obtain reimbursement for the operation of the Project named below for the Payment Period listed below. The payment is requested for the portion of the contract budget stated in 
Column B (FILL IN).  
SUB RECIPIENT  Home Start  PROJECT  CV-Outreach Support Services  
PAYMENT PERIOD  6/1/22 -3/31/23 TOTAL PAYMENT  
PREPARED BY  Lili Chen (619) 692-0727 xJ4; Name Phone  

Contract Expenditure JUL AUG SEP OCT NOV
Bud2et s to Date Total Total Total Total Total 
Total Total Total Total Total Total Total 

(TOTAL PROGRAM I $ 1ss,ooo.ooI $0.00 $155,000.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 
I hereby certify the above expenditures were incurred in carrying out the objective of the project contract, are authorized in the approved contract budget, and that contracted services were performed in accordance with the Agreement. 



.Pit:)__ .u4<cp_ lEo 
1 Oat. Signature& Title ofSubrecipient Execufr/e 
CITY OF EL CAJON EXHIBIT "C" 
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT -CORONAVIRUS PROGRAM 
PERIODIC PERFORMANCE REPORT 
FY Period Reported: ____F__Y.2--0__1___9_-2 ___0"""2 ....0_________  Quarter/Month Reported: __________a _____  
Agency Name: __________________ _  Reporter's Name: __________________  
Program Name: ________a _________a_ _  Phone Number: ______a _____________  

Numbers served must reflect number of Persons /Pl served. Number of Households (H) served may only be reported with prior approval of the Housing Division. 
Please indicate (P) or (H) : _______________ Annual City Grant Amount: _______________ 
(A) Number of Persons served with El Cajon's CDBG funding this Quarter/Month  (B) How many in Column (A) reported as Hispanic (this Quarter/Month for Each Race)?  (C) Cumulative number of Persons served Year-To-Date (July 1 to end of current report period)  (D) How many in Column (C) reported as Hispanic Year-To-Date?  
1. TOTAL  
Total # Each Race  Total # of Hispanics Each Race  Total # Each Race Year-to-Date  Total # of Hispanics Each Race Year-to-Date  
White  
Black / African American  
Asian  
American Indian / Alaskan Native Native Hawaiian / Other Pacific Islander American Indian / Alaskan Native and White  
Asian and White  
Black / African American and White American Indiana/ Alaskan Native & Blacka/ African American  
Other/Multi-Racial  
2. TOTAL  

Extremely Low Income (0-30% MFI) 
Low Income >30-50% MFI) 
Moderate Income (>50-80% MFI) 
Income above 80% MFI 
3. TOTAL 
Homeless 
Female Headed Households 


Disabled/Special Needs 
IMPORTANT-PLEASE NOTE: 1) Hispanic is no longer considered a race, but an ethnicity and must be reported separately. A member of any race must also report as Hispanic or Non-Hispanic. "Other" is for multi-racial reports only and must be identified in the narrative report. 2) Totals for lines 1, 2, and 3 must match each other for each column. 3) List only unduplicated program participants-clients receiving continued services from previous fiscal year may be counted only once during the new contract year. 
4) A narrative report must accompany this form. The narrative should include the definition of "Persons Served" (typically El Cajon residents) and should reflect all additional data collected as agreed in the contract such as Number of Families served, Number of Projects Completed, Number of Program Hours provided, Number of Bed Nights provided, or other Performance Outcome Measurements. For questions, please call the Housing Division at (619) 441-1a786. 
Rev. 06/13/2014 h:\rh\cdbg-home\yr45-2019 -2020 + cares act\agreements with subs\cdbg-cv3 subs\exhibit c -periodic program report_ 19-20.doc 
EXHIBIT "C-2" 
CDBG LOW MOD CLIENTELE NATIONAL OBJECTIVE REPORT FEDERAL FISCAL YEAR 2019-20 
PROJECT STATUS NARRATIVE 
The purpose of this form is to report accomplishment data for the project named below. This form must be completed for projects providing eligible CDBG/HOME activities to Low to Moderate Income residents of the City of El Cajon. This form must be completed and submitted with each monthly/quarterly Periodic Performance Report. 
AGENCY NAME: 
PROJECT NAME: 
REPORTING PERIOD: 
PREPARED BY: 
NAME PHONE 
PROJECT STATUS: Pending O Active O Complete O Date: 
PROJECT STATUS NARRATIVE: 
PLEASE EXPLAIN HOW YOUR PROJECT/SERVICE PREVENTS, PREPARES FOR OR RESPONDS TO THE CORONA VIRUS PANDEMIC: 
EXHIBIT: D 
.. ·· .. '· 
CITY OF EL CAJON CITY COUNCIL POLICY 
SUBJECT :  Insurance Requirements  POLICY D-3  
REFERENCE :  Adopted 7 /26/94 Amended 11/29/05 Amended 04/14/15  EFFECTIVE 04/14/15  PAGE 1 of 8  


PURPOSE 
To provide a uniform City policy for liability insurance requirements and to establish procedures for its consistent application. 

BACKGROUND 
To help protect the City against liability, all individuals, contractors, agencies and organizations conducting business in association with, on behalf of, or in certain circumstances within the City of El Cajon are required to maintain adequate liability insurance coverage acceptable to the City. 
Because of the differing levels of protection needed for various activities conducted within the City, the City has established policy limits and standards which directly relate to the type of activity being conducted. 

POLICY 
All individuals, contractors, agencies, and organizations conducting business either for the City of El Cajon (or the Successor Agency to the El Cajon Redevelopment Agency) or pursuant to an ordinance, resolution, agreement or policy requiring the maintenance of liability insurance shall provide proof of liability insurance in the following amounts and written on an occurrence basis (claims made coverage will be accepted only after verifying that occurrence coverage is not available): 
1. A combined single limit policy with aggregate limits in the amount of $2 million for all construction projects and for carnivals, subdivisions, and pollution coverage subject to section 5.c. under the heading "INSURANCE STANDARDS,"ewith a m?ximum deductible or self-insurance retention ("SIR") of $500,000; for policies not having a "combined single limit," minimum limits in amounts as follows: 
Commercial General Liability (CGL): Insurance Services Office Form CG 00 01 covering CGL on an "occurrence" basis, including products and completed operations, property damage, bodily injury and personal & advertising injury with limits no less than $1,000,000 per occurrence. If a general aggregate limit applies, either the general aggregate limit shall 
. apply separately to this project/location or the general aggregate limit shall be twice the required occurrence limit. 
Unless staff determines that circumstances (i.e. high risk project, etc.) require the higher limit, the $2,000,000 limit shall be decreased to $1,000,000 with a maximum deductible or SIR of $150,000, when: 

CITY OF EL CAJON CITY COUNCIL POLICY 

SUBJECT : Insurance Requirements POLICY 
REFERENCE :  Adopted 7 /26/94  EFFECTIVE  PAGE  
Amended 11 /29/05  
Amended 04/14/15  04/14/15  2 of 8  

a.  The public improvements portion of a subdivision project is less than $50,000; or  
b.  A construction project (in accordance with the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction-and the Standard Special Provisions, the "Green Book") is for less than $50,000.  

Except as otherwise provided in this policy, a combined single limit policy with aggregate limits in the amount of $2 million for all others, including, but not limited to, athletic leagues, recreation groups, towing companies and public service agencies; for policies not having a "combined single limit/' minimum limits in amounts as follows: 
Commercial General Liability (CGL): Insurance Services Office Form CG 00 01 covering CGL on an "occurrence" basis, including products and completed operations, property damage, bodily injury and personal & advertising injury with limits no less than $1,000,000 per occurrence. If a general aggregate limit applies, either the general aggregate limit shall apply separately to this project/location or the general aggregate limit shall be twice the required occurrence limit. 
3. 
A combined single limit policy with aggregate limits in the amount of $250,000 for homeowners insurance or $500,000 for commercial general liability insurance for small business owners, in either event only where the insurance is required for work in the public right-of-way. "Small business owners" are defined as commercial businesses, or a professional or administrative office uses, where the owners of the business work on-site as their primary calling or vocation, and having no more than two (2) employees not related by blood or marriage. 

4. 
Selected high-risk activities that would otherwise fall under the criteria for category 2 shall be evaluated by staff on a case-by-case basis to determine whether or not the above limits are sufficient. The imposition of liability limits exceeding $2 million for such high-risk activities is appealable to the City Council. 

5. 
$1,000,000 for taxicab companies. 

6. 
$500,000 or actual value, whichever is greater, for "valuable papers" and "in transit" insurance where City records or personal property is being transported or stored outside of City property. 



EXHIBIT D 
CITY OF EL CAJON CITY COUNCIL POLICY 
SUBJECTe:  Insurance Requirements  POLICY D-3  
REFERENCEe:  Adopted 7 /26/94 Amended 11/29/05 Amended 04/14/1e5  EFFECTIVE 04/1e4/1e5  PAGE 3 of 8  

7. 
Exceptions to the above limits may be made for non-profit, charitable, political, community and religious organizations. 

8. 
The policy or policies of insurance may be for all operations or activities of the party purchasing the policy or policies provided, however, that the City or the Successor Agency may require a separate policy exclusively for operations of the purchaser where the City Manager, in his or her sole discretion, determines that a single policy would be inadequate to protect the City or Successor Agency in the event of multiple catastrophes. 

9. 
Workers' compensation insurance shall meet the minimum limits required by law. 


INSURANCE STANDARDS 
1. ADMITTED CARRIERe/ BEST'S RATING A, CLASS VII 
a. Insurers must be "admitted" carriers pursuant to the provisions of the California Insurance Code and in accordance with all requirements of the State Insurance Commission and must be listed in the: 
"OFFICIAL PUBLICATION DEPARTMENT OF INSURANCE STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
45 Fremont Street 
San Francisco, California 94105 
INSURANCE ORGANIZATIONS AUTHORIZED BY THE INSURANCE COMMISSION TO TRANSACT BUSINESS OF INSURANCE 
IN THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA DURING 
[the most recent year for which 
the publication is available]." 
or 
"California Department of Insurance Company Profile." 



EXHIBIT D 
CITY OF EL CAJON CITY COUNCIL POLICY 
SUBJECT :  Insurance Requirements  POLICY D-3  
REFERENCE :  Adopted 7/26/94  EFFECTIVE  PAGE  
Amended 11 /29/05  
Amended 04/14/1 5  04/1 4/1 5  4 of 8  

b. Insurers must have a Best's rating of A, Class VII or higher (this rating includes those insurers with a minimum policyholder's surplus of $50 to $100 million). Exceptions to the Best's rating may be considered when an insurance carrier meets all other standards and can satisfy surplus amounts equivalent to an A, Class VII rating. An exception to the rating requirement may be made for the California State Compensation Insurance Fund if not rated. 
2. NON-ADMITTED CARRIER / BEST'S RATING A, Class XI I 
Exceptions to the "admitted" requirement may be considered when a non-admitted insurance carrier meets all other standards herein and: 
a. is either (i) listed in: 
California Department of Insurance List of Approved Surplus Line Insurers 
LISTING OF FILINGS 
or (ii) is currently a party to co-operation agreements with foreign insurance regulatory authorities acceptable to the City Manager or City Attorney (for example, for insurers located in the United Kingdom, agreements must be with both the Prudential Regulatory Authority ("PRA") and the Financial Conduct Authority ("FCA"), or such successor authority or authorities of PRA and FCA; 
b. 
either the carrier or its parent company has a Best's rating of A, Class VI I (this rating include those insurers with a minimum policyholder's surplus of $50 to $100 million; 

c. 
has ten years or more experience in the business of insurance; and 

d. 
if applicable, the reinsurance carrier has a qualified rating. 


3. GENERAL -INSURANCE CERTIFICATES / ADDITIONAL INSURED 
All insurers (including those insuring against pollution or discharges of hazardous 
materials) must provide certificates of insurance and endorsements evidencing coverage 
prior to the start of any contract. All certificates or endorsements must include: 

EXHIBIT D
CITY OF EL CAJON CITY COUNCIL POLICY 
SUBJECT :  Insurance Requirements  POLICY D-3  
REFERENCE :  Adopted 7 /26/94 Amended 11 /29/05 Amended 04/14/15  EFFECTIVE 04/14/1e5  PAGE 5 of 8  

• 
Name of insurance company issuing each policy. All insurers must provide an original endorsement naming the City of El Cajon (and/or the Successor Agency to the El Cajon Redevelopment Agency), and its (their) elected and appointed officials, officers, employees and volunteerse· (for purposes of this Policy, •individually and collectively, the "City Insureds") as additional insureds. This inclusion as additional insureds shall notbe required of Workers' Compensation or professional liability policies of insurance, and may be waived for "valuable papers" coverage with the approval of the City Attorney. 

• 
All insurers must provide an original endorsement stating that the insurance coverage shall be primary insurance as respects the City of El Cajon (and/or the Successor Agency to the El Cajon Redevelopment Agency), and its (their) elected and appointed officials, officers, employees and volunteers (for purposes of this Policy, individually and collectively, the "City Insureds. Any insurance or self­insurance maintained by the Entity, its officers, officials, employees, or volunteers shall be excess of the Contractor's insurance and shall not contribute with it. 

• 
Waiver of Subrogation endorsement is required on Workers' Compensation . 

. Coverage. 

• 
Address of named insured. 

• 
Description of coverage, including any special coverage required by the contract. 

• 
Policy numbers. 

• 
Policy periods (If claims made basis, must include retroactive date and length of time allowed as extended reporting period). 

• 
Coverage type (occurrence form vs. claims made). 

• 
Authorized signature and date of issuance. An original signature is required: a digital signature is acceptable so long as it complies with the requirements of Government Code §16.5. 

• 
Unless approved by the City Manager or designee, no certificate shall be accepted that qualifies the obligation of the carrier to provide 30 days written notice of cancellation of the policy. With the approval of the City Attorney the obligation to provide notice of cancellation may be reduced to ten (10) days, but only for termination due to the non-payment of any premium. 



EXHIBIT D 
CITY OF EL CAJON CITY COUNCIL POLICY 
SUBJECT :  Insurance Requirements  POLICY D-3  
REFERENCE :  Adopted 7 /26/94 Amended 11 /29/05 Amended 04/14/1e5  EFFECTIVE 04/1e4/1e5  PAGE 6 of 8  

4. PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS 
In addition to the standards set forth above, insurance policies for public works projects must also meet the following insurance requirements set out in the most recent edition of the Green Book adopted by the City Council: 
a. 
All insurance certificates shall bear an endorsement or shall have attached a rider whereby it is provided that, in the event of expiration or proposed cancellation of such policy for any reason whatsoever, the City shall be notified by certified mail, return receipt requested, giving a sufficient time before the date thereof to comply with any applicable law or statute, but in no event less than thirty (30) days before expiration or cancellation is effective, the provisions of section 3 herein notwithstanding; and 

b. 
Compliance with Labor Code §§3700 and 3800 relating to Workers' Compensation. 

c. 
Requirements of the Green Book shall prevail. 


5. PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY 
An applicant for permit(s) to do work within the public right-of-way may establish satisfactory proof of liability insurance in the following manner: 
a. CONTRACTORS 
Contractors must furnish the City with a certificate of liability insurance, which meets the requirements set forth above and any other City requirements contained in this policy. 
b. HOMEOWNERSe/ PROPERTY OWNERS 
Homeowners/Property owners requesting a permit to do work within City rights-of­way or easements immediately adjacent to their respective owned or occupied property, solely for the owner's personal benefit, shall be required to furnish the City with a copy of their homeowner's/property owner's liability insurance policy, which meets the requirements set forth above, with the minimum limits described in category 3 under the heading "POLICY,"above. The policy must be effective during the entire period of the proposed work, plus two (2) calendar years, and must provide coverage for claims arising from the work performed, or improvements owned, by the homeowner in the right-of-way or easement. If the encroachment is 

CITY OF EL CAJON CITY COUNCIL POLICY 
!
i 
t
! 
I
i 

EXHIBIT D 
SUBJECT :  Insurance Requirements  POLICY D-3  
REFERENCE :  Adopted 7 /26/94 Amended 11 /29/05 Amended 04/14/15  EFFECTIVE 04/14/15  PAGE 7 of 8  

i i  ongoing, annual proof of insurance shall be required. The requirement to name the City as an additional insured, and the requirement for a policy for two (2) additional calendar years, may each be waived by the City Council or the City Manager (or her designee) in cases of extreme hardship, in their discretion.  
C.  POLLUTION EXCLUSION  
Applications for the installation of monitoring wells for the evaluation of groundwater pollution or for the discharge of formerly polluted groundwater into the City sewer system must be accompanied by a certificate of liability insurance provided by the property owner. Such liability insurance may not contain a pollution exclusion clause and must explicitly indemnify the City against all hazards which may result from either of these activities, including a worsening of pollution, either within the subsurface adjacent to the original pollution or within the City sewer system.  
Ifthe property_ owner is unable to provide insurance which addresses both general liability and pollution liability, the environmental company or other appropriately qualified entity_ contracting with the property owner for either monitoring well installation or groundwater pollution remediation, may furnish pollution liability insurance on behalf of the property owner.  
Any insurance approved under this subsection c. shall be an occurrence policy, and shall otherwise comply with the provisions of this Policy.  
d.  PUBLIC UTILITIES  
This policy as it relates to work in the public rights-of-way shall not be applicable to Cable TV, Helix Water District, Padre Dam Municipal Water District, SBC, San Diego Gas & Electric, or any other public utility.  
e.  TRANSPORTATIONe/ OVERSIZE LOADSe-PERMITSe-See Chapter 10.24 of the El Cajon Municipal Code.  


EXHIBIT D 
CITY OF EL CAJON CITY COUNCIL POLICY 
SUBJECTe:  Insurance Requirements  POLICY D-3  
REFERENCEe:  Adopted 7/26/94 Amended 11/29/05 Amended 04/14/15  EFFECTIVE 04/14/1e5  PAGE 8 of 8  

TIME LIMITSe/ CANCELLATION PROVISIONS 
All liability insurance required pursuant to this policy shall provide coverage for a sufficient time period to protect the City from liability. The insurer is required to provide a minimum of thirty (30) days-notice of cancellation of any policy. With the approval of the City Attorney (except as provided in section 4, herein) this obligation may be reduced to not less than ten (10) days written notice, but only for termination due to the non-payment of any premium. In no event shall a policy be accepted which terminates prior to the completion of the activity to be covered. 
In certain circumstances, it may be impracticable to obtain continuing insurance coverage due to the duration of the activity or the cost of premature renewal. Under such circumstances, an exception to the coverage period may be made so long as the policy is renewed or replaced with an acceptable insurance carrier and there is no lapse in coverage. Maintenance of proper insurance coverage is a material term of any contract with the City and failure to maintain or renew coverage or to provide evidence of renewal may be treated as a material breach of contract. 

ALTERNATIVE RISK MANAGEMENT PRACTICES; SELF-INSURANCE: RISK-POOLING 
Alternative risk management practices, such as self-insurance, risk pooling, risk retention groups, and other such programs, will be accepted in lieu of commercial insurance policies provided that the coverage meets the requirements of this Policy. Any such alternative risk management practices must meet the financial strength and surplus requirements reflected by the Best's Ratings required of commercial insurance under this Policy. 
Client#· 445932 HOMESTART 
DATE (MM/DD/YYYY)

ACQRDr,. CERTIFICATE OF LIABILITY INSURANCE I 
11/04/2021 
THIS CERTIFICATE IS ISSUED AS A MATTER OF INFORMATION ONLY AND CONFERS NO RIGHTS UPON THE CERTIFICATE HOLDER. THIS 
CERTIFICATE DOES NOT AFFIRMATIVELY OR NEGATIVELY AMEND, EXTEND OR ALTER THE COVERAGE AFFORDED BY THE POLICIES 
BELOW. THIS CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE DOES NOT CONSTITUTE A CONTRACT BETWEEN THE ISSUING INSURER(S), AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OR PRODUCER, AND THE CERTIFICATE HOLDER. 
IMPORTANT: If the certificate holder is an ADDITIONAL INSURED, the policy(ies) must have ADDITIONAL INSURED provisions or be endorsed. If SUBROGATION IS WAIVED, subject to the terms and conditions of the policy, certain policies may require an endorsement. A statement on 
this certificate does not confer any rights to the certificate holder in lieu of such endorsement(s). 
PRODUCER 
.f.i.cT Steve Soriano 
Marsh & Mclennan Agency LLC 
rta8N.o Extl: 858-750-4697 I Fffc, Nol: 858-909-9789 
Marsh & McLennan Ins. Agency LLC 
D..ss: steve.soriano@marshmma.com 
.oM 
PO Box 85638 
INSURER(S) AFFORDING COVERAGE NAIC# 
San Diego, CA 92186 
INSURER Aa: Nonprofits Insurance Alliance of CA 999999 
INSURED 
INSURER B : Republic Indemnity Company of America 22179 
Home Start, Inc. 
INSURERaC: 
5005 Texas Street Suite 203 
INSURER D: 
San Diego, CA 92108 
INSURER Ea: 
INSURER F: 
COVERAGES CERTIFICATE NUMBER: REVISION NUMBER: 
THIS IS TO CERTIFY THAT THE POLICIES OF INSURANCE LISTED BELOW HAVE BEEN ISSUED TO THE INSURED NAMED ABOVE FOR THE POLICY PERIOD 
INDICATED. NOTWITHSTANDING ANY REQUIREMENT, TERM OR CONDITION OF ANY CONTRACT OR OTHER DOCUMENT WITH RESPECT TO WHICH THIS 
CERTIFICATE MAY BE ISSUED OR MAY PERTAIN, THE INSURANCE AFFORDED BY THE POLICIES DESCRIBED HEREIN IS SUBJECT TO ALL THE TERMS, 
EXCLUSIONS AND CONDITIONS OF SUCH POLICIES. LIMITS SHOWN MAY HAVE BEEN REDUCED BY PAID CLAIMS. 

DESCRIPTION OF OPERATIONS/ LOCATIONS/ VEHICLES (ACORD 101, Additional Remarks Schedule, may be attached If more space Is required} 
RE: El Cajon Homeless Outreach Program. City of El Cajon, its elected and appointed officials, officers, 
employees and volunteers are named as additional insured with respects to General Liability as required by 
written contract. Wavier of subrogation applies with respects to Workers Compensation coverage. 
applies with respects to Workers Compensation coverage. 
CERTIFICATE HOLDER CANCELLATION 
SHOULD ANY OF THE ABOVE DESCRIBED POLICIES BE CANCELLED BEFORE 
City of El Cajon 200 Civic Center Way  THE EXPIRATION DATE ACCORDANCE WITH THE  THEREOF, NOTICE WILL BE DELIVERED IN POLICY PROVISIONS.  
El Cajon, CA 92020  AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE  
I  #,,&/ .  

© 1988-2015 ACORD CORPORATION. All rights reserved. 
#S890221a9/M8902168 The ACORD name and logo are registered marks of ACORD 
WSSBS 
INSURED: Home Start, Inc. POLICY #: 202100058 POLICY PERIOD: 0110112021 TO: 0110112022 
THIS ENDORSEMENT CHANGES THE POLICY. PLEASE READ IT CAREFULLY. 
ADDITIONAL INSURED -DESIGNATED PERSON OR ORGANIZATION 
FOOD CONTRIBUTIONS OR CLIENT REFERRALS 
This endorsement modifies insurance provided under the following: 
COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY COVERAGE PART 
SCHEDULE 
Name of Person or Organization: 
Any person or organization that you are required to add as an additional insured on this policy, under a written 
contract or agreement currently in effect, or becoming effective during the term of this policy, in consideration 
of food contributions or client referrals you receive from them. 
A. Section II -Who Is An Insured is amended to include as an additional insured the person(s) or organization(s) shown in the Schedule, but only with respect to liability for "bodily injury", "property damage" or "personal and advertising injury" caused, in whole or in part, by your acts or omissions or the acts or omissions of those acting on your behalf: 
1. 
In the performance of your ongoing operations; or 

2. 
In connection with your premises owned by or rented to you. However: 


1. 
The insurance afforded to such additional insured only applies to the extent permitted by law; and 

2. 
If coverage provided to the additional insured is required by a contract or agreement, the insurance afforded to such additional insured will not be broader than that which you are required by the contract or agreement to provide for such additional insured. 


B. VVith respect to the insurance afforded to these additional insureds, the following is added to Section Ill ­Limits Of Insurance: 
If coverage provided to the additional insured is required by a contract or agreement, the most we will pay on behalf of the additional insured is the amount of insurance: 
1. 
Required by the contract or agreement; or 

2. 
Available under the applicable Limits of Insurance shown in the Declarations; whichever is less. This endorsement shall not increase the applicable Limits of Insurance shown in the Declarations. 


NIAC E25 12 15 Page 1 of 1 
INSURED: POLICY#:  Home Start, Inc. 18399610  POLICY PERIOD:  11 10112021  TO:  1110112022  
WORKERS COMPENSATION ANeD EMPLOYERS LIABILITY INSUeRANCE POLICY  WC 00 03e13 (Ed. 04-84)  

WAIVER OF OUR RIGHT TO RECOVER FROM OTHERS ENDORSEMENT 
We have the right to recover our payments from anyone liable for an injury covered by this policy. We will not enforce our right against the person or organization named in the Schedule. (This agreement applies only to the extent that you perform work under a written contract that requires you to obtain this agreement from us.) 
This agreement shall not operate directly or indirectly to benefit anyone not named in the Schedule. 
Schedule 
State Person or Organization 
California 
City of El Cajon 
200 Civic Center Way El Cajon, CA 92020 
The premium charge for this endorsement shall be 5% of the premium developed in conjunction with the work for which this waiver is provided, subject to a minimum premium of $100. This charge will be billed at the final audit. 
This endorsement changes the policy to which it is attached and is effective on the date issued unless otherwise stated. 
WC 00 03e13 
(Ed. 04-84) 
© 1983 National Council on Compensation Insurance. 
EXHIBIT "E" DECLARATION OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS 
In submitting its proposal, SUBRECIPIENT represents that SUBRECIPIENT's responses to the following questions are true and correct: 
1. The proposed public project may affect the market value of real property in the vicinity of the 
project site. 
a. Does the SUBRECIPIENT or anyone in the SUBRECIPIENT's Yes 
. .
organization have a financial interest in real property located within 
2500 feet of the project site? 
b. Has the SUBRECIPIENT or anyone in the SUBRECIPIENT's 
organization, rendered professional services concerning real property 
located within 2500 feet of the project site? 
. z 
c. Has the SUBRECIPIENT or anyone in the SUBRECIPIENT's organization 
received income from real property that is located within 2500 feet of 
the project site? 
. er
2. The proposed project may affect businesses in the vicinity of the project site. 
a. Does the SUBRECIPIENT or anyone in the SUBRECIPIENT's 
organization have a financial interest in a business located within 2500 
feet of the project site? 
. }?I
b. Has the SUBRECIPIENT or anyone in the SUBRECIPIENT's organization 
rendered professional services concerning a business that is located within 2500 feet of the project site? 






. .0 
c. Has the SUB RECIPIENT or anyone in the SUBRECIPIENT's organization 
received income from a business that is located within 2500 feet of the project site? 
. ,e{
3. Does anyone in SUBRECIPIENT's organization have a spouse or other family 
member who has a financial interest in any such real property or business? 

. ef 

SUBRECIPIENT'S SIGNATURE 
Home Start, Inc. 
This document is signed by an individual clearly authorized to bind SUBRECIPIENT. 
Date: 


./45'/2_2-
---.--,----­

EXHIBIT "F" 
0MB CIRCULAR A-133 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE AUDITS OF STATES, LOCAL GOVERNMENTS AND NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS 
CFDA No. for this Grant/Agreement: 14.218(Community Development Block Grant) 
Non-Federal entities that expend $750,000 or more in a year in Federal awards shall have a single or program­specific audit conducted for that year in accordance with the provisions of 0MB Circular A-133. Please complete the following by placing an "X" in the appropriate box. 
JZ( Home Start, Inc. expended $750,000 or more in 
Federal funds during the prior fiscal year (FY 2020-21 )/calendar year (2021 ).
. did not expend $750,000 or more in 
Federal funds during the prior fiscal year (FY 2020-21 )/calendar year (2021). 
I HEREBY CERTIFY I have the authority to sign for the above named agency and that the agency will comply with the provisions of 0MB Circular A-133 and any other applicable Federal and State laws and regulations hereinafter enacted. 

EXHIBIT "G" WORKER'S COMPENSATION INSURANCE CERTIFICATE 
The Subrecipient shall execute the following form as required by the California Labor Code, Sections 1860 and 1861. 
I am aware of the provision of Section 3700 of the Labor Code which requires every employer to be insured against liability for worker's compensation or to undertake self-insurance in accordance with the provisions of that code, and I will comply with such provisions before commencing the performance of the work of this contract. 
Home Start, Inc. 
By: 
e" J.-
Laur} Tancredi-Baese, Chief Executive Officer 




