Exhibit 2 AGREEMENT FOR HOMELESS OUTREACH AND CASE MANAGEMENT SERVICES BETWEEN CITY OF CARLSBAD AND INTERFAITH COMMUNITY SERVICES , INC . THIS AGREEMENT is made and entered into as of the 1st day of July , 2020 , by and between the CITY OF CARLSBAD , a municipal corporation , ( `` City '' ) , and INTERFAITH COMMUNITY SERVICES , INC. a non-profit organization , ( `` Contractor '' ) . RECITALS A . City requires the professional services of an organization that is experienced in providing outreach and case management services to homeless residents or those residents at-risk of becoming homeless within the City of Carlsbad . It is preferred that such organization has experience working with the Carlsbad Police Departments Homeless Outreach Team ( HOT ) . B . Contractor has the necessary experience in providing professional services and advice related to all of the areas set forth in recital A. C. Contractor has submitted a proposal to City and has affirmed its willingness and ability to perform such work . NOW , THEREFORE , in consideration of these recitals and the mutual covenants contained herein , City and Contractor agree as follows : 1 . SCOPE OF WORK City retains Contractor to perform , and Contractor agrees to render , those services ( the `` Services '' ) that are defined in attached Exhibit `` A '' , which is incorporated by this reference in accordance with this Agreements terms and conditions . 2 . STANDARD OF PERFORMANCE While performing the Services , Contractor will exercise the reasonable professional care and skill customarily exercised by reputable members of Contractor 's profession practicing in the Metropolitan Southern California Area , and will use reasonable diligence and best judgment while exercising its professional skill and expertise . 3 . TERM The term of this Agreement will be effective for a period of one year from the date first above written . The City Manager may amend the Agreement to extend it for up to two ( 2 ) additional one ( 1 ) -year periods or parts thereof . Extensions will be based upon a satisfactory review of Contractor 's performance , City needs , and appropriation of funds by the City Council . The parties will prepare a written amendment indicating the effective date and length of the extended Agreement . Upon expiration of all extension period ( s ) , no additional bid waivers will be granted in favor of this Agreement . 4 . TIME IS OF THE ESSENCE Time is of the essence for each and every provision of this Agreement . 5 . COMPENSATION A . The total fee payable for the Services to be performed ( Exhibit A ) during the initial Agreement term will be three-hundred twelve-thousand four-hundred twenty-two dollars ( $ 312,422 ) . Incremental payments , if applicable , should be made as outlined in Exhibit `` A . '' Contractors budget for expenditure of these funds is set forth in Exhibit B . City Attorney Approved Version 6/12/18 June 23 , 2020 1 Item # 6 Page 7 of 17 Exhibit 2 B . No other compensation for the Services will be allowed except for items covered by subsequent amendments to this Agreement . C. If the City elects to extend the Agreement , the amount shall not exceed three hundred fifteen thousand dollars ( $ 315,000 ) per Agreement year . D. The City reserves the right to withhold a ten percent ( 10 % ) retention until City has accepted the work and/or Services specified in Exhibit `` A . '' 6 . STATUS OF CONTRACTOR Contractor will perform the Services in Contractor 's own way as an independent contractor and in pursuit of Contractor 's independent calling , and not as an employee of City . Contractor will be under control of City only as to the result to be accomplished , but will consult with City as necessary . The persons used by Contractor to provide services under this Agreement will not be considered employees of City for any purposes . The payment made to Contractor pursuant to the Agreement will be the full and complete compensation to which Contractor is entitled . City will not make any federal or state tax withholdings on behalf of Contractor or its agents , employees or subcontractors . City will not be required to pay any workers ' compensation insurance or unemployment contributions on behalf of Contractor or its employees or subcontractors . Contractor agrees to indemnify City within thirty ( 30 ) days for any tax , retirement contribution , social security , overtime payment , unemployment payment or workers ' compensation payment which City may be required to make on behalf of Contractor or any agent , employee , or subcontractor of Contractor for work done under this Agreement . At the Citys election , City may deduct the indemnification amount from any balance owing to Contractor . 7 . SUBCONTRACTING Contractor will not subcontract any portion of the Services without prior written approval of City . If Contractor subcontracts any Services , Contractor will be fully responsible to City for the acts and omissions of Contractor 's subcontractor and of the persons either directly or indirectly employed by the subcontractor , as Contractor is for the acts and omissions of persons directly employed by Contractor . Nothing contained in this Agreement will create any contractual relationship between any subcontractor of Contractor and City . Contractor will be responsible for payment of subcontractors . Contractor will bind every subcontractor and every subcontractor of a subcontractor by the terms of this Agreement applicable to Contractor 's work unless specifically noted to the contrary in the subcontract and approved in writing by City . 8 . OTHER CONTRACTORS The City reserves the right to employ other contractors in connection with the Services . 9 . INDEMNIFICATION Contractor agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the City and its officers , officials , employees and volunteers from and against all claims , damages , losses and expenses including attorneys fees arising out of the performance of the work described herein caused by any negligence , recklessness , or willful misconduct of the Contractor , any subcontractor , anyone directly or indirectly employed by any of them or anyone for whose acts any of them may be liable . The parties expressly agree that any payment , attorneys fee , costs or expense City incurs or makes to or on behalf of an injured employee under the Citys self-administered workers compensation is included as a loss , expense or cost for the purposes of this section , and that this section will survive the expiration or early termination of this Agreement . City Attorney Approved Version 6/12/18 June 23 , 2020 2 Item # 6 Page 8 of 17 Exhibit 2 10 . INSURANCE Contractor will obtain and maintain for the duration of the Agreement and any and all amendments , insurance against claims for injuries to persons or damage to property which may arise out of or in connection with performance of the services by Contractor or Contractors agents , representatives , employees or subcontractors . The insurance will be obtained from an insurance carrier admitted and authorized to do business in the State of California . The insurance carrier is required to have a current Best 's Key Rating of not less than `` A- : VII '' ; OR with a surplus line insurer on the State of Californias List of Approved Surplus Line Insurers ( LASLI ) with a rating in the latest Bests Key Rating Guide of at least A : X ; OR an alien non-admitted insurer listed by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners ( NAIC ) latest quarterly listings report . 10.1 Coverage and Limits . Contractor will maintain the types of coverage and minimum limits indicated below , unless the Risk Manager or City Manager approves a lower amount . These minimum amounts of coverage will not constitute any limitations or cap on Contractor 's indemnification obligations under this Agreement . City , its officers , agents and employees make no representation that the limits of the insurance specified to be carried by Contractor pursuant to this Agreement are adequate to protect Contractor . If Contractor believes that any required insurance coverage is inadequate , Contractor will obtain such additional insurance coverage , as Contractor deems adequate , at Contractor 's sole expense . The full limits available to the named insured shall also be available and applicable to the City as an additional insured . 10.1.1 Commercial General Liability ( CGL ) Insurance . Insurance written on an occurrence basis , including personal & advertising injury , with limits no less than $ 2,000,000 per occurrence . If a general aggregate limit applies , either the general aggregate limit shall apply separately to this project/location or the general aggregate limit

###

