SUBRECIPIENT AGREEMENT
between
CITY OF ESCONDIDO
and
INTERFAITH COMMUNITY SERVICES, INC.
for
the use of Emergency Solutions Grant (ESG-CV) Funds
Escondido Ending Homelessness Project - Quarantined Entry into Emergency Shelter
This SUBRECIPIENT AGREEMENT ("Agreement") is entered into as of this ____ day of
, 1\􀎋,c􀎌-- , 2021 ("Effective Date"), by and between the City of Escondido, a California municipal
Corporation ("Grantee"), and Interfaith Community Services, a California Public Benefit Corporation
("Subrecipient"). (The City and Subrecipient may each individually be referred to herein as a "Party"
and collectively as the "Parties.")
WHEREAS, the Grantee has been allocated Emergency Solutions Grants program ("ESG")
stimulus funding through the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act ("ESG-CV
Funds") from the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development ("HUD"), pursuant to
Subtitle B of Title IV of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act, as amended (42 U.S.C. §§
11371-78) (the "Act"), for the rehabilitation or conversion of buildings for use as emergency shelter for
the homeless, for the payment of certain expenses related to operating emergency shelters, for
essential services related to emergency shelters and street outreach for the homeless, and for
homelessness prevention and rapid re-housing assistance. [Catalogue of Federal Domestic
Assistance (CFDA) 14.231: Federal Award Identification Number (FAIN) [E-20-MW-06-0552].]: and
WHEREAS, the Grantee has approved the provision of funds under the Act to be used by the
Subrecipient as provided in the Subrecipient's Project Work Plan, attached hereto as Exhibit A and
incorporated herein by this reference, and as further modified by any negotiated Statement of Work
("Work Plan"); and
WHEREAS, the Subrecipient represents that it shall perform the work as set forth in the Work
Plan pursuant to the Budget, attached hereto as Exhibit B and incorporated herein by this reference
("Budget"); and
WHEREAS, the Subrecipient warrants that it has the expertise and experience to perform the
work set forth in the Work Plan; and
WHEREAS, the Grantee shall provide ESG-CV Funds to the Subrecipient in the amount set
forth in the Budget, and pursuant to the terms of this Agreement; and
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing recitals and based on the mutual
covenants, terms, and conditions expressed herein, the Parties mutually agree as follows:
I. TERM. The term of this Agreement shall be from December 16, 2020 through December 30,
2021 ("Term").
Subrecipient Agreement - 1 - CAO: 3/3/2021
II. SCOPE OF SERVICES
A. General Administration. In compliance with all of the terms and conditions of this Agreement,
the Subrecipient shall provide the services set forth in the Scope of Work, which provides a
description of each activity, including the services to be performed, the person or entity
providing the services, the estimated number for recipients of the services, and the manner
and means of the services. The Subrecipient represents· and warrants that the services to be
provided to implement the Scope of Work shall be performed in a competent, professional,
and satisfactory manner in accordance with the ESG.
B. Statement of Work.
1. The Subrecipient represents that it will negotiate a Statement of Work in accordance with
the Work Plan, which shall include an accurate schedule for performance and completion
of the work ("Statement of Work").
2. The Statement of Work shall be in sufficient detail to provide a sound basis for Grantee to
effectively monitor performance under this Agreement.
3. The Statement of Work shall draw a nexus between the ESG and the Subrecipient's work
to prevent, prepare for, or respond to the COVID-19 pandemic.
4. The Subrecipient shall ensure that there are no duplications of benefits. A duplication of
benefits exists when a program beneficiary receives assistance from multiple funding
sources totaling an amount that exceeds the need for a particular funding need.
C. Use of Funds.
1. The Subrecipient agrees to use any ESG-CV Funds provided by the Grantee pursuant to
the provisions of this Agreement, the Work Plan, the Statement of Work, and the Budget.
The Subrecipient's failure to perform as required may, in addition to other remedies set
forth in this Agreement, result in the readjustment of the amount of ESG-CV Funds the
Grantee is otherwise obligated to pay to the Subrecipient under this Agreement.
2. The Subrecipient shall use any ESG-CV Funds to pay for necessary and reasonable costs
to operate the ESG, including wages, administrative costs, employee benefits comparable
to other similarly situated employees, and other allowable costs as described in the
Budget.
3. If the Subrecipient uses any ESG-CV Funds for the purpose of acquiring real property or to
reduce the cost of financing of the acquisition of real property, there shall be no alteration
of the use of the acquired real property and no additional encumbrances placed on such
real property during the Term of this Agreement, without prior written consent of the
Grantee, such consent not. to be unreasonably withheld.
4. The Subrecipient shall, upon receipt of ESG-CV Funds for the purpose of acquiring or
improving real property, cause a Deed of Trust, secured by a Promissory Note, to be
executed and recorded, in favor of the Grantee, for the amount of the ESG-CV Funds
provided by the Grantee.
5. If the Subrecipient uses ESG-CV Funds for the purpose of acquiring or improving real
property, and further encumbers such real property without first giving notice to the
Subrecipient Agreement - 2 - CAO: 3/3/2021
Grantee and obtaining the Grantee's written consent, such consent not to be unreasonably
withheld, such occurrence shall be cause for termination or revocation of this Agreement
and reversion of the assets as described in this Agreement, or collection on any
Promissory Note executed in favor of the Grantee.
Ill. BUDGET
A. The Subrecipient shall adhere to the Budget specified in Exhibit B.
8. The Subrecipient represents that the Budget incudes only allowable costs and an accurate
analysis of costs applicable to ESG-CV Funds pursuant to 24 C.F.R. § 576.100, which
includes requirements for compliance with the following in addition to other requirements as
stated in 2 C.F.R. Part 200, Subpart E (Cost Principles).
C. The Budget shall be in sufficient detail to provide a sound basis for the Grantee to effectively
monitor performance under this Agreement.
D. The Grantee may require a more detailed Budget breakdown than what is contained in Exhibit
B, and the Subrecipient shall provide such supplementary Budget information in a timely
fashion in the form and content prescribed by the Grantee. Any changes to the Budget may
only be made by written amendment signed by both the Grantee and the Subrecipient
IV. PAYMENT
A The total amount of ESG-CV Funds to be paid by the Grantee under this Agreement shall not
exceed $552,803.
B. Any payment of ESG-CV Funds shall be made in installments determined by the Grantee.
Payment shall be made to the Subrecipient through the submission of monthly invoices, in a
form prescribed by the Grantee, detailing such expenses. The Grantee shall pay such
invoices within 30 days after receipt thereof, provided the Grantee is satisfied that such
expenses have been incurred pursuant to and within the scope of this Agreement and that the
Subrecipient is otherwise in compliance with the terms and conditions of this Agreement.
C. Payments to the Subrecipient are contingent upon HUD's delivery of payment to the Grantee.
D. Payments to the Subrecipient may be contingent upon certification of the Subrecipient's
financial management system in accordance with the standards specified in 2 C.F.R. §
200.302.
V. NOTICES. All notices required by this Agreement shall be in writing and delivered to the
appropriate Party via U.S. mail (postage prepaid), commercial courier, or personal delivery, and
addressed as follows:
If to the Grantee
City of Escondido
Housing & Neighborhood Services Division
201 N. Broadway
Escondido, CA 92115
Subrecipient Agreement - 3 - CAO: 3/3/2021
If to the Subrecipient
Interfaith Community Services
550 West Washington
Escondido, CA 92025
VI. GENERAL CONDITIONS
A. General Compliance.
1. The Subrecipient shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, regulations,
and policies governing the funds provided under this Agreement, including but not limited
to federal ESG-CV financial and contractual procedures and 2 C.F.R. Part 200.
\ 2. The Subrecipient shall lawfully secure any permits required for the activities described in
the Scope of Work and shall maintain any presently required permits.
3. The Subrecipient shall obtain and maintain all licenses, registrations, accreditations, and
inspections from all agencies governing its operations. The Subrecipient shall ensure that
its staff and volunteers also obtain and maintain all required licenses, registrations,
accreditations, and inspections from all agencies regulating the Subrecipient's operations.
4. The Subrecipient shall utilize funds available under this Agreement to supplement rather
than supplant funds otherwise available.
B. Independent Contractor. Nothing contained in this Agreement is intended to, or shall be
construed in any n,anner, as creating or establishing the relationship of employer/employee
between the Parties. The Subrecipient is an independent contractor and no agency or
employment relationship, either express or implied, is created by the execution of this
Agreement. The performance of the Activities is an integral part of the regular business
operations of the Subrecipient. The Subrecipient shall have exclusive control over all work
performed by its employees and the manner in which it is performed and shall determine the
method, details, and means of performing the Activities. In addition to any other
indemnification required by the Subrecipient under this Agreement, the Subrecipient
indemnifies Grantee for any claims, losses, costs, fees, liabilities, damages, or injuries
suffered by the Grantee arising out of the Subrecipient's breach of this section.
C. Grantee Recognition. The Subrecipient shall insure recognition of the role of the Grantee in
the Subrecipient's performance of the activities through this Agreement. Any activity, facility,
or item performed or utilized pursuant to this Agreement shall be prominently labeled as to its
funding source. In addition, the Subrecipient shall include a reference to the support provided
in this Agreement in all publications made possible with funds made available under this
Agreement.
D. Amendment.
1. The Grantee or the Subrecipient may amend this Agreement at any time provided that
such amendment makes specific reference to this Agreement; is executed in writing and
signed by a duly authorized representative of each Party; and is approved by the Grantee's
governing body.
2. The Grantee may, in its discretion, amend this Agreement to comply with federal, state, or
Subrecipient Agreement - 4 - CAO: 3/3/2021
local laws, regulations, guidelines, or policies, except that if any such amendment results in
a change in the funding or the Activities under this Agreement, such amendment may be
made only by written amendment signed by both the Grantee and the Subrecipient as
otherwise required by this Agreement.
VII. INDEMNIFICATION & INSURANCE
A Indemnification, Duty to Defend. and Hold Harmless. The Subrecipient (including the
Subrecipient's agents, employees, and subcontractors, if any) shall hold harmless, defend,
and indemnify the Grantee, its officials, officers, agents, employees, and volunteers from and
against any and all claims, demands, actions, causes of action, proceedings (including but not
limited to legal and administrative proceedings of any kind), suits, fines, penalties, judgments,
orders, levies, costs, expenses, liabilities, losses, damages, or injuries, in law or equity,
including without limitation the payment of all consequential damages and attorney's fees and
other related litigation costs and expenses (collectively, "Claims"), of every nature caused by,
arising out of, or in connection with the Subrecipient's (including the Subrecipient's agents,
employees, and subcontractors, if any) performance of the Activities or its failure to comply
with any of its obligations contained in this Agreement, except where caused by the active
negligence, sole negligence, or willful misconduct of the Grantee. This provision shall survive
the termination of this Agreement.
B. Insurance.
1. The Subrecipient shall comply with the insurance requirements of 2 C.F.R. §§ 200.310 and
200.447.
2. The Subrecipient shall carry sufficient insurance coverage to protect contract assets from
loss due to theft, fraud, and undue physical damage.
3. The Subrecipient shall procure and maintain, at its own cost, during the entire term of this
Agreement, insurance against claims for injuries to persons or damages to property that
may arise from or in connection with the performance of the Activities, and the results of
such work, by the Subrecipient, its agents, representatives, employees, or subcontracts.
Insurance coverage shall be at least as broad as the following:
a. Commercial General Liability. Insurance Services Office ("ISO") Form CG 00 Oi
covering Commercial General Liability on an "occurrence" basis, including products
and completed operations, property damage, bodily injury, and personal & advertising
injury, with limits no less than $2,000,000 per occurrence, $4,000,000 general
aggregate.
b. Automobile Liability. ISO Form CA 00 01 covering any auto (Code 1 ), or if the
Subrecipient has no owned autos, hired (Code 8) and non-owned autos (Code 9), with
limits no less than $1,000,000 per accident for bodily injury and property damage,
unless waived by the Grantee and approved in writing by the Grantee's Risk and
Safety Division.
c. Workers' Compensation. Workers' Compensation as required by the state of
California, with Statutory Limits, and Employer's Liability Insurance with limits of no
less than $1,000,000 per accident for bodily injury or disease.
Subrecipient Agreement - 5 - CAO: 3/3/2021
d. Professional Liability (Errors and Omissions). Professional Liability (Errors and
Omissions) appropriate to the Subrecipient's professions, with limits no less than
$2,000,000 per occurrence or claim, $2,000,000 aggregate.
e. If the Subrecipient maintains broader coverage and/or higher limits than the minimums
otherwise required by this Agreement, the Grantee requires and shall be entitled to the
broader coverage and/or the higher limits maintained by the Subrecipient.
4. Each insurance policy required by this Agreement must be acceptable to the Grantee's
City Attorney and shall meet the following requirements:
a. Acceptability of Insurers. Insurance coverage must be provided by an insurer
autho'rized to conduct business in the state of California with a current AM. Best's
rating of no less than A-:VII, or as approved by the Grantee.
b. Additional Insured Status. Both the Commercial General Liability and the Automobile
Liability policies must name the Grantee (including its officials, officers, agents,
employees, and volunteers) specifically as an additional insured under the policy on a
separate endorsement page. The Commercial General Liability additional insured
endorsement shall be at least as broad as ISO Form CG 20 10 11 85, or if not
available, through the addition of both CG 20 10, CG 20 26, CG 20 33, or CG 20 38,
and CG 20 37 if a later edition is used. The Automobile Liability endorsement shall be
at least as broad as ISO Form CA 20 01.
c. Primary Coverage. The Subrecipient's insurance coverage shall be primary coverage
at least as broad as ISO CG 20 01 04 13 with respect to the Grantee, its officials,
officers, agents, employees, and volunteers. Any insurance or self-insurance
maintained by the Grantee, its officials, officers, agents, employees, or volunteers shall
be in excess of the Subrecipient's insurance and shall not contribute with it.
d. Notice of Cancellation. Each insurance policy shall provide that coverage shall not be
canceled, except with prior written notice to the Grantee.
e. Subcontractors. If applicable, the Subrecipient shall require and verify that all
subcontractors maintain insurance meeting all the requirements stated within this
Agreement, and the Subrecipient shall ensure that the Grantee (including its officials,
officers, agents, employees, and volunteers) is an additional insured of any insurance
required from a subcontractor.
f. Waiver of Subrogation. The Subrecipient hereby grants to the Grantee a waiver of any
right to subrogation that any insurer of the Subrecipient may acquire against the
Grantee by virtue of the payment of any loss under such insurance. The Subrecipient
agrees to obtain any endorsement that may be necessary to affect this waiver of
subrogation, but his subsection shall apply regardless of whether or not the Grantee
has received a waiver of subrogation endorsement from the insurer. Any Workers'
Compensation policy required by this Agreement shall be endorsed with a waiver of
subrogation in favor of the Grantee for all work performed by the Subrecipient, its
agents, representatives, employees, and subcontractors.
g. Self-Insurance. The Subrecipient may, with the Grantee's prior written consent, fulfill
some or all of the insurance requirements contained in this Agreement under a plan of
self-insurance. The Subrecipient shall only be permitted to utilize such self-insurance
if, in the opinion of the Grantee, the Subrecipient's (i) net worth and (ii) reserves for
Subrecipie11t Agreement - 6 - CAO: 3/3/2021
payment of claims of liability against the Subrecipient are sufficient to adequately
compensate for the lack of other insurance coverage required by this Agreement. The
Subrecipient's utilization of self-insurance shall not in any way limit the liabilities
assumed by the Subrecipient pursuant to this Agreement.
h. Se/f-/nsurec/ Retentions. Self-insured retentions must be declared to and approved by
this Grantee.
5. Verification of Coverage. At the time the Subrecipient executes this Agreement, the
Subrecipient shall provide the Grantee with original Certificates of Insurance including all
required amendatory endorsements (or copies of the applicable policy language effecting
the insurance coverage required by this Agreement), which shall meet all requirements
under this Agreement. The Grantee reserves the right to require complete, certified copies
of all required insurance policies, including endorsements required by this Agreement, at
any time.
6. Special Risks or Circumstances. The Grantee reserves the right, at any point during the
term of this Agreement, to modify the insurance requirements in this Agreement, including
limits, based on the nature of the risk, prior experience, insurer, coverage, or other special
circumstances.
7. No Limitation of Obligations. The insurance requirements in this Agreement, including the
types and limits of insurance coverage the Subrecipient must maintain, and any approval
of such insurance by the Grantee, are not intended to and shall not in any manner limit or
qualify the liabilities and obligations otherwise assumed by the Subrecipient pursuant to
this Agreement, including but not limited to any provisions in this Agreement concerning
indemnification .
8. Failure to comply with any of the insurance requirements in this Agreement, including but
not limited to a lapse in any required insurance coverage during the term of this
Agreement, shall be a material breach of this Agreement. In the event that the
Subrecipient fails to comply with any such insurance requirements in this Agreement, in
addition to any other remedies the Grantee may have, the Grantee may, at its sole option,
(i) immediately terminate this Agreement, or (ii) order the Subrecipient to stop work under
this Agreement and/or withhold any payment that becomes due to the Subrecipient until
the Subrecipient demonstrates compliance with the insurance requirements in this
Agreement.
VIII. TERMINATION
A Suspension or Termination. The Grantee may suspend or terminate this Agreement if the
Subrecipient materially fails to comply with any terms of this Agreement, which may
include (but is not limited to) the following:
1. Failure to comply with any of the federal, state, or local laws, regulations, executive
orders, HUD guidelines, policies, or directives referred to herein, or any federal, state,
or local laws, regulations, executive orders, HUD guidelines, policies, or directives that
may become applicable to this Agreement at any time;
2. Failure, for any reason, of the Subrecipient to fulfill in a timely and proper manner its
obligations under this Agreement, as determined by Grantee in its sole discretion;
3. Ineffective or improper use of funds provided under this Agreement; or
Subrecipient Agreement - 7 - CAO: 3/3/2021
4 . S u bm ission b y t h e S u b recipient t o the G rantee a report that i s incorrect o r incomplete
in a n y m aterial respect.
B . The G ra ntee s h a l l h ave the right to term i nate this Ag reement immediately or with hold
payment of i nvoice for fa i l u re of the S ubrecipient to com ply with the term s and cond itions
of this Agreem ent. If the Gra ntee decides to term i nate th i s Agreement, after a ful l
eva l uation o f a l l circumstances h a s been completed , the S u brecipient s h a l l , upon written
req uest, have the right to an appeal process. The G rantee s h a l l attach a copy of the
appeal proces s to a n y term i nation notice.
C. If the G ra ntee finds that the Subrecipient has violated any term o r condition of this
Ag reement, the S u brecipient s h a l l be req u i red to:
1 . Repay a l l m o n ies received from the Gra ntee under this Agreement; and
2 . Transfer possession o f a l l materia l s and equipment purchased with g rant money t o the
G rante e .
D. I n t h e c a s e of e a r l y term ination, t h e G rantee may m a k e a fin a l payment to t h e Subrecipient
upon receipt of a Final Report and invoices covering e l i g i b l e costs incurred prior to such
term i nati o n . The total of a l l payments , including the f i n a l payment, s h a l l n o t exceed the
a m o u nt s pe cified in this A g reement.
E. Term i n ation fo r Conve n ience. This Agreement may be term inated for convenience by
either Party, i n whole or in part, by setting forth the reasons for s uch term ination , the
effective d ate of such term ination , a n d , in the case of partial term i n ation, the portion to be
term i n ated . H oweve r, if in the case of a partia l term inati o n , the G rantee determines that
the rem a i n i n g portion of the award will not accomplish the purpose for which the award
was m a d e , the G ra ntee m a y term inate the Agreement in its entirety. Grantee and
S u brecipient agree to provide written notice to the other party within 3 0 d ays prior to the
effective date of any termi n ation for convenience. In the event that HUD withdraws any
portion of the C ity's E S G -CV fu nds, the C ity s h a l l not be obligated to reimburse the
S u brecipient for a n y activity expense incurred and may recover reimbursed amounts
a l ready paid. The Grantee s h a l l notify the S ubrecipient if such event by H U D occurs.
I X . AD M I N I ST RATIVE REQU I RE M E NTS
A. Financial M a n agement.
1 . Accou nting Standard s . The Subrecipient shall comply with 2 C . F. R. Part 200 and s h a l l
adhere to the acco u nting principles and procedure s req u ired there i n , including following
Generally Accepted Accounting Pri nciples (GMP) as defi ned in 2 C . F. R. § 200.49. The
S u brecipient s h a l l util ize adeq uate internal contro ls and maintain necessary source
docu mentation for a l l costs i ncurred .
2 . Cost P rinciple s . The Subrecipient s h a l l admin ister its program i n conformance with 2
C . F . R . P a rt 2 0 0 , Subpart E. These principles s h a l l be applied for a l l costs i ncurred,
whether charged on a direct or indirect basis.
3 . Separation o f Accounts. All funds received by the S ubrecipient from the G ra ntee pursuant
to this Agreement shall be m aintained separate and apart from a n y other fund of the
S u brecipient, or of any pri n cipal or member of the S u brecipient, i n an accou nt i n a federal l y
S u brecipient Agreement - 8 - CAO: 3/3/2021
i n s u red banking or savi n g s and loan i nstitution. No m o n ie s s h a l l be withdrawn from su ch
acco u n t except for expenditures authorized by this Agreement.
4 . Audit of Account. The G ra ntee s h a l l include a n audit of the acco u nt maintained b y the
Su b recipient in the City's a n n u a l audit of all E S G -CV F u n d s p u rs uant to federal reg u l ations
found i n Title 24 of the Code of Federal Reg u lations and other applicable federal laws and
reg u l ations.
B . Docum entation and Record Keeping.
1 . Records and Reports to Be Maintained. The S u brecipient s h a l l m a i ntain a l l records and
reports req u i red by the reg ulations s pecified in 24 C . F . R . §§ 576.2 and 576.407, and 2
C . F. R . Part 200, that are perti nent to t h e activities to be funded u nder this Agreement.
S u ch records and reports s h a l l incl ude but s h a l l not be l i m ited to:
a. records providing a fu l l description o f e a c h activity u nd ertaken;
b. records demonstrati n g that each activity undertaken m eets one of the ESG-CV Eligible
Activities ;
c. records documenting the n um ber, race, and i ncome level of persons and/or fam i lies
participating i n o r benefiting from the S ubrecipient's progra m ;
d. records documenting t h e acq uisition, im provement, u s e , or d i s position o f real property
or e q u ipment acq u i red or i m p roved with E SG-CV Funds;
e . records docu m e nting compliance with the fair h o u s i ng a n d equal opportunity
compo ne nts of the pro g ra m ;
f. records documenting a l l E SG-CV Funds received from t h e G rantee;
g . record s docu m e nting expenses as identified in the B u d g et ;
h . records documenting h ow duplication o f benefits h a s been avoided;
i . a n y other related records a s t h e Grantee m a y requ i re;
j . Payment Request/I nvoice Reports ;
k. Q u a rterly Perform ance and Demographic Reports;
I. Final Evaluation Reports ;
m . any such other reports as the Grantee may req uire;
5. Homeless Management I nformation System (H M I S). The S ubrecipient shall adopt and
comply with all req u i red H o meless Management I nformation System (" H M I S") policies and
proce d u res, including d ata collection, privacy , and security req uirements. The
S u b recipient shall u s e H M I S and other pertinent data collected i n the com m unity to assist
with eva l u ating ESG-CV a ctivities within the context of broader system performance and to
i nform s u bsequent E S G -CV program allocation s . The S u brecipient s h a l l consistently
collect and report performance data to i nteg rate i nto H M I S . The S u brecipient shall provide
Subrecipient Agreement - 9 - CAO: 3/3/202 1
H M IS data necessary for specific elements of the Consolidated Plan and Consolidated
Annual Performance Evaluation Report (CAPER).
6. Retention. The Subrecipient shall retain all financial records, supporting documents,
statistical records, and all other records pertinent to the Agreement for a period of four
years. The retention period begins on the date of the submission of the Grantee's annual
performance and evaluation report to HUD in which the activities assisted under the
Agreement are reported on for the final time. Notwithstanding the above, if there is
litigation, claims, audits, negotiations, or other actions that involve any of the records cited
and that have started before the expiration of the four-year period, then such records must
be retained until completion of the actions and resolution of all issues, or the expiration of
the four-year period, whichever occurs later.
3. Client Data. The Subrecipient shall maintain client data demonstrating client eligibility for
services provided. Such data shall include, but shall not be limited to, client name,
address, income level, or any other basis for determining eligibility, and description of
service provided. Such information shall be made available to the Grantee monitors or
their designees for review upon request. I
4. Disclosure. The Subrecipient understands that client information collected under this
Agreement is private and the use or disclosure of such information, when not directly
connected with the administration of the Grantee's or Subrecipient's responsibilities under
this Agreement, may be prohibited by state and federal law unless written consent is
obtained from such person receiving service and, in the case of a minor, that of a
responsible parent/guardian.
6. Audits & Inspections. All Subrecipient records with respect to any matters covered by this
Agreement shall be made available to the Grantee, granter agency, and the Comptroller
General of the United States, or any of their authorized representatives, at any time during
normal business hours, as often as deemed necessary, to audit, examine, and make
excerpts or transcripts of all relevant data. Such monitoring activities may also include, but
are not limited to, questioning employees and participants in the program and entering any
premises or any site in which any of the services of activities funded by ESG-CV Funds are
conducted or in which any of the records of the Subrecipient are stored. In the event the
Subrecipient does not make any requested documents or records available within the City
of Escondido, California, the Subrecipient shall pay all necessary and reasonable
expenses incurred by the City in conducting any audit at the location where such
documents or records are maintained. Any deficiencies noted in audit reports must be fully
cleared by the Subrecipient within 30 days after receipt by the Subrecipient. Failure of the
Subrecipient to comply with the audit requirements within this Agreement shall constitute a
violation of this Agreement and may result in the withholding of future payments, The
Subrecipient hereby agrees to have an annual agency audit conducted in accordance with
current Grantee policy concerning subrecipient audits and 2 C.F.R. Part 200, Subpart F.
7. Additional Documentation. The Subrecipient shall provide further documentation as the
Grantee may request in relation to the requirements of this Agreement.
Subrecipient Agreement - 1 0 - CAO: 3/3/2021
C. Reporting and Payment Procedures.
1. Program Income. Program income shall have the same meaning provided in 2 C.F.R §
200.80. For purposes of ESG, program income will also include any amount of a security
or utility deposit returned to the Subrecipient. The Subrecipient shall use all income
received from the ESG-CV Funds only for the same purposes for which the ESG-CV
Funds may be expended pursuant to the terms and conditions of this Agreement. Costs
paid by program income may count toward meeting the matching requirements, provided
the costs are eligible ESG costs that supplement the program.
2. Indirect Costs. If indirect costs are charged, the Subrecipient shall develop an indirect cost
allocation plan for determining the Subrecipient's appropriate share of administrative costs
and shall submit such plan to the Grantee for approval, in a form specified by the Grantee.
3. Payment Procedures. The Grantee shall pay to the Subrecipient funds available under this
Agreement based upon information submitted by the Subrecipient and consistent with the
approved Budget and G rantee policy concerning payments. With the exception of certain
advances, payments shall only be made for eligible expenses actually incurred by the
Subrecipient, and not to exceed actual cash requirements. Payments shall be adjusted by
the Grantee in accordance with advance fund balances available in Subrecipient accounts.
In addition , the Grantee reserves the right to liquidate funds available under this
Agreement for costs incurred by the Grantee on behalf of the Subrecipient.
4. Progress Reports. The Subrecipient shall submit regular progress reports to the Grantee
in the form, content, and frequency required by the Grantee.
D. Use and Reversion of Assets.
1. Upon the termination or expiration of the Term of this Agreement, the Subrecipient shall
transfer to the Grantee any ESG-CV Funds on hand at the time of such termination or
expiration, in addition to any accounts receivable attributable to the use of such ESG-CV
Funds.
2. Any real property under the Subrecipient's control that was acquired or improved in whole
or in part with ESG-CV Funds shall either be:
a. used to meet one of the eligible activities stated in 24 C.F.R. §§ 576.100-109 until five
years after termination or expiration of the Term of this Agreement, or for such longer
periods of time as determined to be appropriate by the Grantee; or
b. disposed of in a manner that results in the Grantee being reimbursed in the amount of
the current fair market value of the property less any portion of the value attributable to
expenditures of non-ESG-CV Funds for acquisition or improvement of the property.
Reimbursement to the Grantee shall not be required after the period specified in
Section IX(D)(2)(a) of this Agreement.
X. PERSON NEL & PARTICIPANT CONDITIONS
A. Civil Rights.
Subrecipient Agreement - 1 1 - CAO: 3/3/2021
1 . Compliance. The S u brecipient ag rees to comply with l ocal a n d state civil rights laws and
reg ulation s , including but not l i m ited to the U n ruh Civil Rig hts Act, C a l iforn ia Civil Code §
5 1 , and t h e Fair Em ployment and Housing Act, Ca l ifornia G overn m e n t Code section 1 2900
et seq. The S u brecipient a l s o a g rees to comply with Titl e VI of the Civil R ig hts Act of 1 964,
as amended; Title VI I I of the Civil Righ ts Act of 1 968, as amended; Section 1 04(b) and
Section 1 09 of Title I of the Housing and Com m u n ity Development Act of 1 97 4 , as
amended ( " H C DA"); Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1 973; the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1 990; the Age Discri m ination Act of 1 97 5 ; Executive Order 1 1 06 3 , as
amended; Executive Order 1 1 246, as amended, and of the ru les, reg u lations, and relevant
orders of the U n ited States S ecretary of Labor.
2. ·tand C ovenants. This Agreement is s u bject to the req u irements of Title VI of the Civil
Rights Act of 1 964 ( P . L. 88-352) . In regard to the sale, lease, o r other transfer of land
acq uired, cleared, or i m proved with assistance provided u n d e r this Ag reement, the
S u brecipient shall cause o r req u ire a covenant ru n n in g with the l a nd to be inserted within
the deed or lease for s u ch transfer, proh i biting d iscrim in ation as herein defined, in the sale,
lease, or renta l , or i n t h e use o r occupancy of such land, o r i n a n y i m p rovements erected
or to be e rected there o n , providing that the Grantee a n d t h e U nited States are
beneficia ries of and entitled to enforce such covenants . The S ubrecipient, in undertaking
its obligation to ca rry out the prog ram assisted here under, agrees to take such meas ures
as are necessary to enforce such covenant, and will not itself so d iscri m inate.
3. Section 504. The S u brecipient ag rees to comply with all federa l reg u l ations issued
pursuant to com p l i a n ce with Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1 973 (29 U . S . C. §
794 ) , which prohibi ts discri m i nation against the i ndividuals with disabilities or handicaps i n
any fede ra l l y assisted prog ram . T h e G rantee shall provide the S u brecipient with a n y
g u idelines necessary f o r complian ce with that portion o f t h e reg ulations i n force during the
term of t h i s Ag reement.
4 . Executive Ord e r 1 1 246 (Nondiscrimination Provisions). D uring the performance of this
Agreement, the S ubrecipient agrees as fol l ows:
a . The S u brecipient will _not d iscri m i n ate against any employee or applicant for
e m ployment because of race, color, religion, sex, sexual o rientation , g ender identity or
expressio n , national ori g i n , age, disability, or a n individ u a l ' s status i n any group or
class protected by applica ble federa l , state , o r local laws. The S u brecipient wil l take
affirmative action to ensure that applicants are empl oyed, and that employees are
treated d u ring employment, without regard to their race , color, religion, sex, sexual
orientati o n , gender identity or expression, national o ri gi n , age, disability, or an
i ndivid u a l 's status in any g roup or class protected by applicable federa l , state , or l ocal
laws. S uch action shall incl ude , but not be l i m ited to the fol l owing: employm ent,
upgrad i n g , demotion, or transfer; recruitment o r recru itment advertising; layoff or
term ination; rates of pay o r other forms of compensation; and selection for tra i n i n g ,
i n c l u d i n g apprenticeship. T h e S u brecipient a g rees to post i n conspicuous places,
available to emp loyees and applica nts for em ployment, notices to be provided by the
contracting offi cer setting forth the provisions of this nondiscri m i nation clause.
b . The S u brecipient wi l l , i n a l l solicitations or advancements for e mp l oyees placed b y o r
on behalf o f t h e S u brecipient, state t h a t all q u a l ified applica nts w i l l receive
cons ideration fo r em p l oyment without regard to race, color. religion, sex, sexual
orientati o n . gender identity o r expression , national o rigin, age, disability, or an
i ndivid u a l ' s status i n a n y g roup or class protected by applicable fed e ra l , state, or local
l aws .
Subrecipient Agreement - i 2 - CAO: 3/3/2021
c. The S u breci pient will not d ischarg e or in any othe r m a n ne r d iscrimi nate against any
e m p l oyee or applicant for em ployment because such e m ployee o r applicant has
i n q u i red a bout, discussed, or d isclosed the compensation of the e m p l oyee or applicant
or another empl oyee or applicant. This provision s h a l l not apply to i nstan ces in which
an e m p l oyee who h a s access to the compensation i nformation of other employees or
appl icants as a part of s uch e mployee's essentia l j o b functions discloses the
com pe nsation of such other employees or applica nts to ind ividu a l s who do not
otherwise have a ccess to s u ch information , u n le s s such disclosure is in response to a
form a l complaint or charge, in furtherance of an i nvestigation , proceeding, hearin g , o r
action , i n c l u d i n g a n i nvestigation conducted by the employer, or is consistent with the
S u brecipient's l e g a l d uty to furn ish info rm ation.
d . The S ubrecipient w i l l s e n d t o each labor u n i o n , o r representative o f workers with whom
the S u brecipient has a col lective barg a i n i ng agreement or other contract or other
u n d e rsta n d i n g , a n otice, to be provided by the a g en cy contracting officer, advising the
labor u n i o n or wo rker's representative of the S ub recipient's commitm ents u nder
Section 202 of Executive Order 1 1 246, as amended, and any other commitments
h e re u n d e r, a n d s h a l l post copies of the notice in con s p icuous places available to
e m pl oyees and a p p licants for em ployment.
e . The S u brecipient will comply with all provisions of Executive Order No. 1 1 246 of
Septe mber 24, 1 965, as amended, and of the ru l e s , regu lation s , and relevant orders of
the U n ited States Secretary of La bor.
f. The S u brecipient w i l l furn i s h and cause each of its own s u b recipients or su bcontractors
to furn ish a l l information and re ports req u ired by Executive O rd e r 1 1 246, as amended;
the ru les, reg u latio n s , and relevant o rders of the U n ited States Secretary of Labor; and
any s uch i nformation or reports otherwise req u ired hereunder, and will permit access to
its books, record s , and accounts by the G rantee, H U D or its agent, the U n ited States
Secretary of Labor, or other authorized federa l officials for purposes of investigation to
ascertai n com plian ce with such rules, reg ulations, and o rd e rs, and the provisions
stated herein.
g . I n the event of the S u brecipient's noncompliance with the n o n d iscrimination clauses of
this Agreem e nt or with a n y of such ru les, reg ulations, or o rders, this Agreement may
be cance l l e d , term i nated , or s uspended in whole or in part a n d the S ubrecipient may
be d e c l a red ineligi b l e for further Government contracts in a ccord a n ce with procedures
a uth orized i n Executive Order 1 1 246 of September 24, 1 965, as amended, and such
other s a n ctions may be im posed and remedies i nvoked as provi d e in Executive Order
1 1 246 of Septem be r 24, 1 965, as amended, or by rul e , reg ulation, or order of the
U n ited States Secretary of Labor, o r as otherwise provided by l aw.
h . The S u brecipient wil l include the provisions of Section X(A)(4) (a) -(h) in every
subco ntract or purchase o rder un less exem pted by rules, reg u lations, or o rders of the
U n ited States Secretary of Labor issued pursuant to Section 204 of Executive Order
1 1 246 of September 24, 1 965, as amended, so that such provisions wi l l be binding
upon each subcontractor or vendor. The S ubrecipient wi l l take such action with
res pect to any subcontract or purchase order as may be d irected by the U n ited States
Secretary of Labor as a means of e nforcing such provisions i n c l u d i n g sanctions for
noncompliance. P rovid e d , however, that in the event the Subrecipient becomes
invo lved i n , or is threatened wit h , l itig ation with a su bcontractor or vendor as a result of
Subrecipient Agreement - i 3 - CAO: 3/3/2021
such direction, the Subrecipient may request the United States to enter into such
litigation to protect the interests of the United States.
8. Affirmative Action.
·t . Approved Plan. The Subrecipient agrees that it shall be committed to carry out pursuant to
the Grantee's specifications an Affirmative Action Program in keeping with the principles as
provided in President's Executive Order 11246 of September 24, 1965, as amended. The
Subrecipient shall submit a plan for an Affirmative Action Program for approval prior to the
award of funds, consistent with the Affirmative Action Program Policy articulated in
Exhibit C, which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by this reference.
2. Women- and Minority-Owned Businesses. The Subrecipient wil l use its best efforts to
afford small businesses, minority business enterprises, and women's business enterprises
the maximum practicable opportunity to participate in the performance of this Agreement.
As used in this Agreement, the term "small business" shall mean a business that meets the
criteria set forth in Section 3(a) of the Small Business Act, as amended (15 U.S.C. § 632),
and the terms "minority business enterprise" and "women's business enterprise" shall
mean a business at least 51 % owned and controlled by minority group members or
women, as further defined in 15 U.S.C. § 632(n). For the purpose of this definition,
"minority group members" are such groups including but not limited to African Americans,
Hispanic Americans, Native Americans, Indian tribes, Asian Pacific Americans, Native
Hawaiian Organizations, and other miriorities. The Subrecipient may rely on written
representations by a business regarding its status as a women's business enterprise or
minority business enterprise in lieu of an independent investigation.
3. Prior Discrimination. The Subrecipient shall comply with 24 C. F.R. Part 6, with respect to
affirmative action necessary to overcome the effects of prior discrimination, if any, and
such affirmative action shall be incorporated into the Subrecipient's Affirmative Action
Program.
C. Employment Restrictions.
1. Prohibited Activity. The Subrecipient is prohibited from using funds provided herein or
personnel employed in the administration of the program for political activities, inherently
religious activities, lobbying, political patronage, and nepotism activities.
2. Labor Standards.
a. The Subrecipient shall comply with the requirements of the Secretary of Labor in
accordance with the Davis-Bacon Act, as amended; the provisions of Contract Work
Hours and Safety Standards Act (40 U.S.C. § 327 et seq.); and all other applicable
federal, state, and local laws and regulations pertaining to labor standards insofar as
those acts apply to the performance of this Agreement. The Subrecipient shall comply
with the Copeland Anti-Kick Back Act (18 U.S.C. § 874 et seq.) and its implementing
regulations of the U.S. Department of Labor at 29 C. F.R. Part 5. The Subrecipient
shall maintain documentation that demonstrates compliance with hour and wage
requirements of this part. Such documentation shall be made available to the Grantee
for review upon request.
b. The Subrecipient, except with respect to the rehabilitation or construction of residential
property containing fewer than eight units, all contractors engaged under contracts in
excess of $2,000 for construction, renovation, or repair work financed in whole or in
S u brncipient Agreement - 14 - CAO: 3/3/202 1
part with assistance provided under this Agreement, shall comply with federal
requirements adopted by the Grantee pertaining to such contracts and with the
applicable requirements of the regulations of the Department of Labor, under 29 C.F.R.
Parts 1, 3, 5, and 7 governing the payment of wages and ratio of apprentices and
trainees to journey workers; provided that, if wage rates higher than those required
under the regulations are imposed by state or local law, nothing hereunder is intended
to relieve the Subrecipient of its obligation, if any, to require payment of the higher
wage. The Subrecipient shall cause or require to be inserted in full, in all such
contracts subject to such regulations, provisions meeting the requirements of this
paragraph.
c. Workers' Compensation and Safety. The Subrecipient shall comply with all federal and
state workers' compensation and safety laws, including but not limited to the applicable
provisions of Divisions 4 and 5 of the California Labor Code and all amendments
thereto, and all similar and applicable state or federal acts or laws.
3. Economic Opportunities for Low- and Very Low-Income Persons. The Subrecipient shall
ensure that employment and other economic opportunities generated by the program shall,
to the greatest extent feasible, be directed to low- and very-low-income persons,
particularly those who are recipients of government assistance for housing. Section 3 of
the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968, 12 U.S.C. § 1701u, and regulations at
24 C.F.R. Part 135 apply to this Agreement, except that homeless individuals have priority
over other Section 3 residents in accordance with 24 C.F.R. § 576.405(c).
D. Conduct.
1 Assignability. The Subrecipient shall not assign or transfer any interest in this Agreement
without the Grantee's prior written consent; provided, however, that claims for money due
or to become due to the Subrecipient from the Grantee under this Agreement may be
assigned to a bank, trust company, or other financial institution without such approval.
Notice of any such assignment or transfer shall be furnished promptly to the Grantee.
2. Subcontracts.
a. Approvals. The Subrecipient shall not enter into any subcontracts with any agency or
individual in the performance of this Agreement without the Grantee's prior written
consent.
b. Monitoring. The Subrecipient shall monitor all subcontracted services on a regular
basis to assure contract compliance. Results of monitoring efforts shall be
summarized in written reports and supported with documented evidence of follow-up
actions taken to correct areas of noncompliance.
c. Content. The Subrecipient shall cause all of the provisions of this Agreement in its
entirety to be included in and made a part of any subcontract executed in the
performance of this Agreement.
d. Selection Process. The Subrecipient shall undertake to ensure that all subcontracts let
in the performance of this Agreement shall be awarded on a fair and open competition
basis in accordance with applicable procurement requirements. Executed copies of all
subcontracts shall be forwarded to the Grantee along with any documentation
concerning the selection process.
Subrecipient Agreement - 1 5 - CAO: 3/3/2021
3. Hatch Act. The Subrecipient agrees that no funds provided, nor personnel employed
under this Agreement, shall be in any way or to any extent engaged in the conduct of
political activities in violation of Chapter 15 of Title V of the U.S.C.
4. Conflict of Interest. In the procurement of supplies, equipment, construction, and services
by the Subrecipient, the conflict of interest provisions in 2 C.F.R. §§ 200.317-326 and 24
C. F.R. § 576.404 shall apply.
5. Lobbying. The Subrecipient hereby certifies that:
a. No federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid, by or on behalf of the
Subrecipient, to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or
employee of any agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress,
or an employee of a Member of Congress in connection with the awarding of any
federal contract, the making of any federal grant, the making of any federal loan, the
entering into of any cooperative agreement, and the extension, continuation, renewal.
amendment, or modification of any federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative
agreement;
b. If any funds other than federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid to any
person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any agency,
a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a
Member of Congress in connection with this federal contract, grant, loan, or
cooperative agreement, the Subrecipient will complete and submit Standard Form-LLL,
"Disclosure Form to Report Lobbying," in accordance with its instructions; and
c. The Subrecipient will require that the certification language expressed in subparagraph
(d) be included in the award documents for all subawards at all tiers (including
subcontracts, subgrants, and contracts under grants, loans, and cooperative
agreements) and that all subrecipients shall certify and disclose accordingly:
d. Lobbying Certification. This certification is a material representation of fact upon which
reliance was placed when this transaction was made or entered into. Submission of
this certification is a prerequisite for making or entering into this transaction imposed by
31 U.S C. § 1352. Any person who fails to file the required certification shall be subject
to a civil penalty of not less than $10,000 and not more than $100,000 for each such
failure.
6. Copyright. If this Agreement results in the creation or production of any copyrightable work,
material, or invention, the Grantee and grantor agency reserves the right to a royalty-free,
non-exclusive, and irrevocable license to reproduce, publish, or otherwise use, and to
authorize others to use, such work, material, or invention for governmental purposes.
7. Religious Activities. The Subrecipient agrees that funds provided under this Agreement
shall not be utilized for inherently religious activities, such as worship, religious instruction,
or proselytization, as part of the Subrecipient's program or services. If the Subrecipient
conducts such activities, the activities must be offered separately, in time or location, from
such programs or services, and participation must be voluntary for the participants. The
Subrecipient shall not, in providing program assistance, discriminate against a program
participant or prospective program participant on the basis of religion or religious belief. If
the Subrecipient is a religious organization, it retains its independence from federal, state,
and local governments, and may continue to carry out its mission, including the definition,
practice, and expression of its religious beliefs, provided that the religious organization
Sub1·ecipient Ag1·eernent • 1 6 - CAO: 3/3/2021
does not use direct ESG-CV Funds to support any inherently religious activities. The
Subrecipient agrees that rehabilitation of structures by the religious organization in
connection with such program must be in sound accord with 24 C. F.R. § 576.406.
8. Ineligibility of Subrecipients. The Subrecipient shall not use ESG-CV Funds directly or
indirectly in its operations or to employ, award contracts to, or otherwise engage the
services of or fund any contractor or subcontractor, during any period of disbarment.
suspension, or placement in ineligibility status of the Subrecipient or such contractor or
subcontractor under the provisions of 24 C.F.R. Part 24.
XI. ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
A. Air and Water. The Subrecipient agrees to comply with the following requirements insofar as
they apply to the performance of this Agreement:
1. Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. § 7401 et seq., as amended, and all regulations and guidelines
issued thereunder;
2. Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., as amended, and all
regulations and guidelines issued thereunder, including but not limited to the requirements
within 33 U.S.C. § 1318 relating to inspection, monitoring, entry, reports, and information;
and
3. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regulations pursuant to 40 C.F.R. Part 50, as
amended.
8. Flood Disaster Protection. In accordance with the requirements of the Flood Disaster
Protection Act of 1973 (42 U.S.C. § 4001 ), the Subrecipient shall ensure that for activities
located in an area identified by the Federal Emergency Management Act (FEMA) as having
special flood hazards, flood insurance under the National Flood Insurance Program is obtained
and maintained as a condition of financial assistance for acquisition or construction purposes
(including rehabilitation).
C. Lead-Based Paint. The Subrecipient agrees that any construction or rehabilitation of
residential structures with assistance provided under this Agreement shall be subject to HUD
Lead-Based Paint Regulations at 24 C. F.R. Part 35, Subpart B. Such regulations require that
all owners, prospective owners, and tenants of properties constructed prior to 1978 be
properly notified that such properties may include lead-based paint. Such notification shall
point out the hazards of lead-based paint and explain the symptoms, treatment, and
precautions that should be taken when dealing with lead-based paint poisoning and the
advisability and availability of blood lead level screening for children under seven. The notice
should also point out that if lead-based paint is found on the property, abatement measures
may be undertaken. The regulations further require that, depending on the amount of federal
funds applied to a property, paint testing, risk assessment, treatment, and/or abatement may
be conducted.
D. Historic Preservation. The Subrecipient agrees to comply with the Historic Preservation
requirements set forth in the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, 16 U.S.C. § 470, as
amended, and the procedures set forth in 36 C.F.R. Part 800, insofar as they apply to the
performance of this Agreement. In general, this requires concurrence from the State Historic
Preservation Officer for all rehabilitation and demolition of historic properties that are 50 years
old or older, or that are included on a federal, state, or local historic property list.
Subrecipient Agreement - 1 7 - CAO: 3/3/202 1
X I I . D R U G - F R E E WOR KP LA C E . Throug h out t h e Term of t h i s Agreement, t h e S ubrecipient shall
provide a d rug-free workplace by:
8. P u b l i s h i n g a statement notifying em ployees that the u nlawful m a n ufacture, distri bution ,
dispe n s i n g , posses s i o n , or use of a control led substance is pro h i b ited in the S u brecip ient's
workp lace and specifying the a ctions that will be taken against e m p l oyee s for violation of
such prohibition.
C . Esta b l i s h i n g a n ongoing d rug-free awa reness progra m to i nform em ployees a bout:
1 . the dangers of drug abuse in the workplace;
2 . t h e S u brecipient's policy o f m a i ntaining a drug -free workplace;
3. any ava i l a b l e d rug counse l i n g , rehabil itation, and employee assistance programs; and
4 . t h e penalties that m a y b e i m posed upon employees for drug abuse violations occurring
in the workplace.
D . Requiri n g that each em ployee who is engag ed in the performance of a ctivities under the
Agreement be g iven a copy of the statement requ i red by S ection X l l (A) of this Agreement
and notifying such em ployee that, as a condition of employment, the employee will (i)
abide by the term s of the statement, and (ii) n otify the S u brecipient and appropriate
G rantee officials in writing of his or her conviction for a violation of a crim inal drug statute
occurri ng in the workplace no later than five calendar days after s u ch conviction.
E . N otifying the G ra ntee and H U D , in writing, within 1 0 calendar days after receiving n otice
from an e mployee under Section X l l (C) of this Agreement, or otherwis e receiving a ctual
notice of such convictio n . Employers of convicted em ployees m ust provide notice,
including position title, to every g ra nt officer or oth er designee on whose g rant activity the
co nvicted em ployee was work i n g , u n less the federal agency has desig nated a central point
for the rece ipt of such notices. N otice shall include the identification n u m ber of each
affected g rant.
F. Withi n 30 days of receivi n g notice of a n y violation , the S ubrecipient shall take appropriate
personnel action against the applicable employee , up to and including term ination, and
req u i ring each such employee to participate satisfactorily i n a d rug abuse assistance or
rehabilitation prog ram approved for such p u rposes by a federal, state, or local health, law
enforcem ent, or other appropriate agency.
G. For the purposes of this Section XI I , "em ployee" shall mean a person d i rectly engaged in
the perfo rma nce of work u nder this Agreement, including (i) all "direct cha rge" employees;
(ii) all "ind irect cha rge" em ployees, u n le s s their im pact or i nvolvem ent is insign ificant to the
perform a n ce of work under this Ag reement; and (iii) tem porary pe rsonnel and consu ltants
who a re directly engaged in the perform a nce of work under this Agreement and on the
S u brecipient's payroll.
X I I I . M I S C E L LAN EO U S
Subrecipient Agreement - 1 8 - CAO 3/3/2021
A. Severabil ity. Th is Agreement s h a l l be performed and s h a l l be e nforceable to the full e xtent
allowed by a p pl i cable law, and the illegality, i nvalidity, waiver, or u n enforceability of any
provis i o n s of this Agreement s h a l l not affect the legality, validity, a ppl icability, or
enforcea bility of the rem a i n i n g provisions of this Agreement.
8 . Merger C l a u s e . T h i s Agreement, together with i t s attac h m e nts o r othe r documents
described or incorporated here i n , if any, constitutes the entire agreement and
u ndersta nding of the Parties concern ing the s u bject of this Ag reement and s upersedes and
replaces all prior negotiations, understa ndings, or proposed a g reements, written or ora l ,
except a s otherwise provided herein. I n t h e event o f any conflict between the provisions of
this Agreement and any of its attachments or related documents, if any, the provisions of
this Ag re e m e nt s h a l l prevai l .
C . Govern ing Law. T h i s Ag reem e nt and all rights and obligations a rising out o f i t s h a l l be
construed in accordan ce with the laws of the State of California. Ven u e for any a ction
a ri s i n g from t h i s Agreement s h a l l be con d u cted only i n the state or federal courts of San
Diego C o u nty, Cal iforn i a .
D . Anti-Waiver C l a u s e . None o f t h e provisions o f this Agreem e nt s h a l l be waived by the
G ra ntee because of previous fa i l u re to insist upon strict perform a n ce, nor shall any
provision be waived because any other provision has been waived by the Grantee , in
whole or i n part.
E. Attorney's Fees a n d Costs. In any action to enforce the terms a n d conditions of this
Agre e m e nt, the preva i l ing party s h a l l be entitled to reasonable attorney's fees and costs.
F. M u ltiple Copies of Agreem ents/Counterpa rts. Thi s Agreement may be executed on
separate counterparts, each of which s h a l l be an origi n a l and all of which taken together
s h a l l constitute one and the same i nstrument. Del ivery of a n executed signature page of
this Agre e ment by e lectronic means, including a n attachment to a n e m a i l , s h a l l be effective
as delive ry of an executed orig i n a l .
G . Provis i o n s C u m u lative. T h e provisions i n t h i s Agreement a r e c u m u lative to, in addition t o ,
a n d not i n l i m itation o f any o t h e r rights o r remedies available to the Grantee.
H. B u s i n es s License. The S u brecipient s h a l l obtain a City of Escondido Business License
prior to execution of t h i s Agreement and s h a l l maintain such B usiness License throug hout
the term of this Ag reement.
I . Compl i a n ce with Laws, Perm its . and Licenses. The S ubrecipient shall keep itself informed
of a nd c o m p l y with a l l applicable federa l , state, and local laws, statutes, code s , ordinances,
reg u l ation s , rules, arid other leg al req u irem ents in effect d u ring the term of this Agreement,
i n c l u d i ng but not l i m ited to any such l aws , statutes , codes, ord i na n ces, reg ulations, and
other leg al req u irements expressly referen ced i n this Agreement. The S u b recipient s h a l l
obtain a n y a n d a l l permits, licenses, and o t h e r authorizations necessary to perform t h e
Activities. N e ither the G rantee, nor a n y e lected o r a ppointed board s , officers , officials ,
em ployees, or agents of the Gra ntee, s h a l l b e liable, a t law or i n e q u ity, a s a result of any
fa i l u re of t h e S u brecipient to comply with this paragraph.
J . I m m igration Reform and Control Act of 1 986. The S u brecipient s h a l l keep itself informed
of and s h a l l comply with the I m m ig ration Reform and Control Act of 1 986 (" I RCA"). The
S u brecipient represents and warrants that all of its em ployees and the employees of any
s u bco ntractor retained by the S u brecipient who perform any of the activities u nder this
S u b recipient Agreement - 1 9 - CAO: 3/3/2021
Ag ree m ent. a re and will be authorized to perform such activities in fu ll compliance with the
I RCA. The S u brecipient affirms that as a li censed employer in the State of California, all
new employees m ust produce proof of eligibility to work in the United States within the first
three d ays of employment and that only employees legally eligible to work in the U nited
States wi l l pe rform the activities u nder this Agreement. Th e Subrecipient agrees to comply
with the I RCA before comm encing any activities under this Ag re em ent. and continuously
throughout the performance of such activities a nd the Term of this Agreement.
K. Effective Date. Unless a different date is provided in this Agreement, the effective date of
this Agreement shall be the latest date of execution set forth by the names of the
sig natories be low.
IN WIT N E S S WHEREOF, this Ag reement is executed by the Parties .or their duly authorized
re prese ntatives as of the Effective Date.
Date:
Date:
APPROV E D AS TO FORM:
O F F I C E OF THE C I TY ATTORNEY
M I C HAEL R . MCGU I N N E S S , C ity Allorney
CITY OF ESCON D I DO
M ichael Strong
Director of Community Development
Sign ature
C /2 eG A-A)(; LeA ) CEO
N a m e & Title (please print)
THE CITY OF ESCONDIDO DOES NOT DISCRI MI NATE AGAINST QUALIFIED PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.
S u brecipienl Agreement • 20 - CAO: 3/3/2021
E X H I B I T A
PROJ E C T WOR K P LA N
O rgan izatio n : Interfaith Community Services ______________ _
P roject Title: Escondido Ending Homelessness Project - Quarantined Entry into Emergency Shelter
G oal S tatem ent: To allow quarantined entry into Haven House, to ensure that individuals entering
emergency shelter are not carriers for COVID-19
O bj ective : Interfaith will serve 24 individuals with an average of $825 for a 10-day quarantine period.
Key Activities
Create documents and files as required per
ESG and Coronavirus grant standards
Screen individuals/families in need of
emergency shelter
Ensure all clients are entered into the CES
P rovide room and food for a 10-day quarantine
period to ensure that people entering Haven
House are virus-free
Enter data at required into H M I S and internal
database
Complete reports and invoices as required per
grant agreement
Date
December 1, 2020 - December 31,
2021
December 1, 2020 - December 31,
2021
December 1, 2020 - December 31,
2021
December 1, 2020 - December 31,
2021
On-going
On-going
If the proposed program has more than one objective, please submit a separate work plan form for
each objective. You may wish to make a copy of this page prior to completion.
Subrecipient Agreement - 21 - CAO: 3/3/2021
E X H I B I T B
B U DG E T
O rga n izati o n : I n terfaith C o m m u n ity Services
P roject Title: Escondido E n d i ng Homelessness P roject - Q uara ntined E ntry i nto E m e rgency She lter
E S C O N D I DO OTH E R F U N DS PROJECT
I T E M F U N D I N G A M O U N T S O U R C E TOTAL
Pers o n n e l
O pe rating E x p e n ses
Financial Assista n ce
H otel expenses for 24 individ u a l s 1 8 , 000
for 1 0 d ays at $75 per n i q ht
Food @ $2. 50 ( F EMA rate) per 1 , 800
meal = $7 . 5 0 per day per client
for 1 0 days
I ncidentals (special 200
accommodations for clients o r
room d a m age fees)
Tota l $20, 000
S u t)reci pient Agreement - 22 - CAO: 3/3/2021
E X H I B I T C
Affi rmative Acti o n P rogra m Policy
Subrecipient Agreement - 23 CAO: 3/3/2021
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PLAN
SUl3RECIPIENT: Xrrh:..vt0,L t° V\ Ctm VYlClV\l±\,,_i 􀀎tt..V\ (CS
sTREET ADDRi:ss: %10 'v\i • V\J C\􀀗h l_D:@±s.i\.:,, v.,'\_ :; A􀀎V _t....• ______
CITY. STATE. 1.ri>: Es c ondLd u CA ___ j_)',)_--=''---''d-.:....:5􀀕----
'TT:LF:PH ONE N lJ iV! f3ER: 7 lQ O - Y i q:J.Q_'3--='i;:.... O="'l ________ [ R S / [ D : Oj s-- ?/6' 􀀌-➔-7-- \- Lt- ---------------------
I . The Subi-ccipient 1rnmed above is committed lo a policy nl' Al'firmative Action to ensme Equal
Employment Opportunity in response lo Executive Orders 1 0925. I 1 1 14. and 1 1 246. as
nrnended. and relevant requirements adopted by the City. including all provisions of the
Sub1·ecipienr Agreement concurrently entered into between lhe Subrecipient and the City.
2. The official dcsi\2,natccl b\' the Subrecipicnt to be Equal Employment Officer 1s:
Dt\'lD_ L)_ _ _t: L.i@% CL􀀒
J The Subrccipient will document Cull)' its afl'innalive actions. which will be at least as extensive
llS tlw rollowing:
a. The Subrecipienl will not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment
because of race. color. religion. sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression.
national origin, age. disability. or an inclividual·s status in any group or class protel'.tecl by
applicable federal. stale. or local ln,vs. The Subrecipient will take affirmative action to
ensure that upplicanls are employed. and that employees me treated during employment.
without rcgnrd to their rncc. color. religion. sex. sexual orientation. gender identity or
expression. national origin. age, disability. or an individual's status in any group or class
protected by applicable feclernl. state. or local laws. Such action shall include. but not be
limited lo the following: employment. upgrading, demotion. or transfer: recruitment or
recruitment advertising: layoff or termination: rates ol" pay or other forms of
cornpi.:·nsation: and selection for training. including apprenticeship.
b. The Subrecipient will ensure and maintain a working environment free of harnssment.
intimidation. and coercion al a!I sites and in all facilities at which the Subrccipient's
employees arc assigned to work. The Subrecipienl. where possible. will nssign two or
more women lo each construction project. The Subrecipicnl shall speci l'icillly ensure thal
all foremen. superintendents. and olher on-site supervisory personnel are aware of. ,md
carry out. the Subn:cipient's obligntion to maintain such ,1 working environment. with
specific attention 10 minority or lemale individuals working at such sites or in such
facilities.
c. The Subrecipicnt will cslublish and maintain a current list or minority and lemule
recruitment sources und prnvide written notilkation lo minority und l'cmalc recruitment
sources ,md lo community orgnnizations when the Subrecipient or i ts unions have
employment opportunities arnilable anti maintain a record of the organizations' responses.
S u brec1pient Agreement · 24 - CAO: 3/3/2021
d. The Subrecipie11t ,viii maintain a cmrcnt r-ile on the names. addresses. nnd telephone
numbers of e,1ch minority and lenrnle olT-thc-strccl applicant and minority organization
and of \Vlrnl r1ctio11 was taken with respect to each such individual. If such inc!iviclua! \ms
sent to the union hiring hall for rcl'erral and was not rclcrrccl buck to the Subrccipicnt by
the union or. if rclcrred. no! employed by the Subrecipienl. this shall bi:: documented in
the lilc ,vith the reason therefore. along ,vith whatever additional actions the Subredpiem
may have t:1ke11.
e. The Subrecipient will provide immediate written notilkation to the Director of Office of
Federal Contract Compliance Programs when the union or unions with which the
Subrecipient has a minority person or cwoollmecatniv ese bnat rbgya inlhincg S augbrreeecmipeicnnt th, aosr nwoht erenf ethrree dS utob rtchcei pSicunbtr ehcaisp ioetnhte ar
int'ormati011 tlrnl the union referral process has impeded the Subrecipient 's efforts to meet
its obligations.
r. The Subrecipient will develop on-the-job lratntng opporlun1l1es and/or part1c1pate 111
trn1ntng prngrnms for the area llrnt expressly include minorities and women, including
upgrading progrnrns and apprenticeship and trainee programs relevant to the Subrecipient
's employment needs. especially those programs !"uncled or approved by the Department of
Labor, The Subreeipienl shall provide notice o r these programs to the sources compiled
under subsection ( b) above.
g, The Subrecipienl will disseminate the Subrecipient 's Equal Employment Opportunity
policy by providing notice of the policy to unions and trnining programs and requesting
their cooperation in assisting the Subrecipient in meeting its Equal Employment
Opportunity obligations: by including the policy in any policy manual and collective
bargaining agreement: by publicizing the policy in the company newspaper. annual
repol'l. and similar publications: by specific review· of the policy with all management
personnel and with all minority and lenrnle employees at least once a year: and by posting
the policy on bulletin boards accessible to all employees at each _locution where
construction work is perfonnecL
h. The Sulm:cipient will review. al least annually. the company's Equal Employment
Opportunity Policy and Aflirmative Action obligations with all employees having any
responsibility for hiring. assignment. layoff. termination. or other employment decisions.
including specific n::\'ie,.,. of these items with on-site supervisory personnel including but
not limited to superintendents nncl general f<Jremen. prior to the initiation or construction
work at any job site. A written record shall be made and maintained identilYing the time
and place of these meetings. persons attending. subject matter discussed. and disposition or the subject rnnttcr.
1. The Subrccipient 1, ill disseminate the Subrecipient's Equal Employment Opportunity
policy cxtl:rnally by including it in any advertising in the news media. specilica!ly
including 111i1mrity and lernalc news media and providing ,vrittcn notilication to and
discussing the Subrccipient's Equal Employment Opportunity policy with other
Subrecipicnts and Contractors with whom the Subrecipient docs. or anticipates doing.
business.
Subrecipienl Agreement • 25 • CAO: 3/3/202'1
_1. The Subrceipi<.:nt will direct its recruitment efforts. both om! and \Vrittcn. to minority.
lcmale. und community organizations. lo schools with minority and Jcmak students. and
to minority and [cmak rccrnitmcnl and training organizations serving the Subrecipient's
recruitment arcc1 and employment needs. Not Inter than one month prior lo lhc dale for
the acccplancc o r applications h.ir apprenticeship or other trnining by any recruitment
source. the Subrecipicnl shal I send written noti [ication lo mganizations such as the above.
describing the npe11111gs. serccning procedures. and tests to be used in th<:: seb:tion
process.
k. The Subrccipienl will e11courage present minority and female employees to recruit other
minority persons and women and where reasonable, provide aner-school. summer. and
vacation ernploymt::nl lo minority and lcrnale youth, both on the site and in other areas or
a Subrt::cipient's \\'Orkforcc.
I. The Subrccipicnl will validate all tt::sts and other selection requirements where there is an
obligation to do so.
m. The Subrecipient IVill conduct. at least annually, nn inventory and evaluation at least of' all
minority and fomde personnel for promotional opportunities and encourage these
employees to seek or lo prepnrc l<.)L through appropriate training. such opportunities.
n. The Subrecipient wil l ensure that seniority practict::s, job classilicalions. work
assignments. and other personnel practices do not have a discriminttlory effect by
continually monitoring all personnel and employment-related activities to ensure that the
Lqual Employment Oppol"lunity policy. Allirmmivc Action policy, and the Subrecipicnt's
related obligations are being carried oul.
o. The Subrecipicnl will ensure that all facilities and company activities arc non-segregated
except that separntc and single-user toilet and necessary changing facilities shall bL:
provided to assure privacy between the sexes.
p. The Subrccipicnt will document and maintain u record of all solicitations of offers for
subcontracts 1!·0111 minority and fomale construction contractors and suppliers, including
circulation of solicitations to minority and frmale contractor associations and other
business associations.
q. The Subrecipienl will conduct a review, at least annually, or u l l supervisors' aclhercn<.:e to
and performance umler the Subrccipicnt's Equal Employment Opportunity policy and
J\l'lirrnative Action obligations.
4. Sul:'t􀒸 _
c, ic_nl\ s bconlractt_lrs. "':d related con'.ractors shall ma!􀒹1tai11 all required records for a
,.
pcm \! ol K)!llr\:e1rs. or until auclited, and pen
.􀒺􀒻lt access by the C1ly lo all such records.
S1􀒼t. !m:cl: ,l,􀀏V,., 1,________ Signed: E 'l.l{gT yrncnl Oflicer Authorized Ofliccr/Title
Print: ---V􀀌􀀍--ij􀀎---- Print: _______ l)atecl: 􀀂lf { )o).\ 􀒽 -- · ·-·· ___ Dated:
S u brecipient Agreement - 26 - CAO: 3/3/202 1