SUBRECIPIENT AGREEMENT
between
CITY OF ESCONDIDO
and
INTERFAITH COMMUNITY SERVICES, INC.
for
the use of Emergency Solutions Grant (ESG-CV) Funds
Provision of Homeless Outreach Services
--- This SUBRECIPIENT AGREEMENT ("Agreement") is entered into as of this 2.-3, day of
0 -..>\'-'\ , 2021 ("Effective Date"), by and between the City of Escondido, a California municipal
corporati􀀫n ("Grantee"), and Interfaith Community Services, Inc., a California public benefit corporation
("Subrecipient"). (The City and Subrecipient may each individually be referred to herein as a "Party··
and collectively as the "Parties.")
WHEREAS, the Grantee has been allocated Emergency Solutions Grants program ("ESG")
stimulus funding through the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act ("ESG-CV
Funds") from the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development ("HUD"), pursuant to
Subtitle B of Title IV of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act, as amended (42 U.S.C. §§
11371--78) (the "Act"), for the rehabilitation or conversion of buildings for use as emergency shelter for
the homeless, for the payment of certain expenses related to operating emergency shelters, for
essential services related to emergency shelters and street outreach for the homeless, and for homeless
prevention and rapid re-housing assistance. [Catalogue of Federal Domestic Assistance (CFDA)
14.23'1; Federal Award Identification Number (FAIN) [E-20-MW-06-0552].J; and
WHEREAS, the Grantee has approved the provision of funds under the Act to be used by the
Subrecipient as provided in the Subrecipient's Work Plan, attached hereto as Exhibit A and
incorporated herein by this reference, and as further modified by any negotiated Statement of Work
("Work Plan"); and
WHEREAS, the Subrecipient represents that it shall perform the work as set forth in the Work
Plan pursuant to the Budget, attached hereto as Exhibit B and incorporated herein by this refe:·ence
("Budget"); and
WHEREAS, the Subrecipient warrants that it has the expertise and experience to perform tile
work set forth in the \fl.fork P!an; and
WHEREAS, the Grantee shail pmvide ESG-CV Funds to the Subrecipient in the amount set
forth in the Budget, and pursuant to the terms of this Agreernent; and
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoinQ recital:: and based on the mutual
covenants, terms, and conditions expressed herein, the Parties mutually agr8e as follows:
I. [f;R􀑓. The term of this Agreement shall be from the ,.July 1, 202'1 through Jun•:: 30, 2022 ("Term").
Subrncipient Agreement CAD: 2/24i2021
II. SCOPE OF SERVICES
A General Administration. In compliance with all of the terms and conditions of this Agreement,
the Subrecipient shall provide the services set forth in the Scope of Work, which provides a
description of each activity, including the services to be performed, the person or entity providing
the services, the estimated number for recipients of the services, and the manner and means of
the services. The Subrecipient represents and warrants that the services to be provided to
implement the Scope of Work shall be performed in a competent, professional, and satisfactory
manner in accordance with the ESG.
B. Statement of Work.
1. The Subrecipient represents that it will negotiate a Statement of Work in accordance with
the Work Plan, which shall include an accurate schedule for performance and completion of
the work ("Statement of Work").
2. The Statement of Work shall be in sufficient detail to provide a sound basis for Grantee to
effectively monitor performance under this Agreement.
3. The Statement of Work shall draw a nexus between the ESG and the Subrecipient's work to
prevent, prepare for, or respond to the COVI D-19 pandemic.
4. The Subrecipient shall ensure that there are no duplications of benefits. A duplication of
benefits exists when a program beneficiary receives assistance from multiple funding
sources totaling an amount that exceeds the need for a particular funding need.
C. Use of Funds.
1. The Subrecipient agrees to use any ESG-CV Funds provided by the Grantee pursuant to
the provisions of this Agreement, the Work Plan, the Statement of Work, and the Budget.
The Subrecipient's failure to perform as required may, in addition to other remedies set forth
in this Agreement, result in the readjustment of the amount of ESG-CV Funds the Grantee
is otherwise obligated to pay to the Subrecipient under this Agreement.
2. The Subrecipient shall use any ESG-CV Funds to pay for necessary and reasonable costs
to operate the ESG, including wages, administrative costs, employee benefits comparable
to other similarly situated employees, and other allowable costs as described in the Budget.
3. If the Subrecipient uses any ESG-CV Funds for the purpose of acquiring real property or to
reduce the cost of financing of the acquisition of real property, there shall be no alteration of
the use of the acquired real property and no additional encumbrances placed on such real
property during the Term of this Agreement, without prior written consent of the Grantee,
such consent not to be unreasonably withheld.
4. The Subrecipient shall, upon receipt of ESG-CV Funds for the purpose of acquiring or
improving real property, cause a Deed of Trust, secured by a Promissory Note, to be
executed and recorded, in favor of the Grantee, for the amount of the ESG-CF Funds
provided by the Grantee.
5. If the Subrecipient uses ESG-CV Funds for the purpose of acquiring or improving real
property, and further encumbers such real property without first giving notice to the Grantee
and obtaining the Grantee's written consent, such consent not to be unreasonably withheld,
Subrecipient Agreement - 2 - CAO: 2/24/2021
such occurrence shall be cause for termination or revocation of this Agreement and
reversion of the assets as described in this Agreement, or collection on any Promissory Note
executed in favor of the Grantee.
Ill. BUDGET
A The Subrecipient shall adhere to the Budget specified in Exhibit B.
8. The Subrecipient represents that the Budget includes only allowable costs and an accurate
analysis of costs applicable to ESG-CV Funds pursuant to 24 C.F.R § 576.100, which includes
requirements for compliance with the following in addition to other requirements as stated in 2
C.F.R. Part 200, Subpart E (Cost Principles).
C. The Budget shall be in sufficient detail to provide a sound basis for the Grantee to effectively
monitor performance under this Agreement.
D. The Grantee may require a more detailed Budget breakdown than what is contained in Exhibit
B, and the Subrecipient shall provide such supplementary Budget information in a timely fashion
in the form and content prescribed by the Grantee. Any changes to the Budget may only be
made by written amendment signed by both the Grantee and the Subrecipient
IV. PAYMENT
A The total amount of ESG-CV Funds to be paid by the Grantee under this Agreement shall not
exceed $78,335.
B. Any payment of ESG-CV Funds shall be made in installments determined by the Grantee.
Payment shall be made to the Subrecipient through the submission of monthly invoices, in a
form prescribed by the Grantee, detailing such expenses. The Grantee shall pay such invoices
within 30 days after receipt thereof, provided the Grantee is satisfied that such expenses have
been incurred pursuant to and within the scope of this Agreement and that the Subrecipient is
otherwise in compliance with the terms and conditions of this Agreement.
C. Payments to the Subrecipient are contingent upon HUD's delivery of payment to the Grantee.
D. Payments to the Subrecipient may be contingent upon certification of the Subrecipient's financial
management system in accordance with the standards specified in 2 C.F.R. § 200.302.
V. NOTICES. All notices required by this Agreement shall be in writing and delivered to the appropriate
Party via U.S. mail (postage prepaid), commercial courier, or personal delivery, and addressed as
follows:
If to the Grantee
City of Escondido
Housing & Neighborhood Services Division
201 N. Broadway
Escondido, CA 92115
Subrecipient Agreement - 3 - CAO: 2/24/2021
If to the Subrecipient
Interfaith Community Services
550 West Washington
Escondido, CA 92025
VI. GENERAL CONDITIONS
A. General Compliance.
1. The Subrecipient shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, regulations,
and policies governing the funds provided under this Agreement, including but not limited to
federal ESG-CV financial and contractual procedures and 2 C.F.R Part 200.
2. The Subrecipient shall lawfully secure any permits required for the activities described in the
Scope of Work and shall maintain any presently required permits.
3. The Subrecipient shall obtain and maintain all licenses, registrations, accreditations, and
inspections from all agencies governing its operations. The Subrecipient shall ensure that
its staff and volunteers also obtain and maintain all required licenses, registrations,
accreditations, and inspections from all agencies regulating the Subrecipient's operations.
4. The Subrecipient shall utilize funds available under this Agreement to supplement rather
than supplant funds otherwise available.
B. Independent Contractor. Nothing contained in this Agreement is intended to, or shall be
construed in any manner, as creating or establishing the relationship of employer/employee
between the Parties. The Subrecipient is an independent contractor and no agency or
employment relationship, either express or implied, is created by the execution of this
Agreement. The performance of the Activities is an integral part of the regular business
operations of the Subrecipient. The Subrecipient shall have exclusive control over all work
performed by its employees and the manner in which it is performed and shall determine the
method, details, and means of performing the Activities. In addition to any other indemnification
required by the Subrecipient under this Agreement, the Subrecipient indemnifies Grantee for
any claims, losses, costs, fees, liabilities, damages, or injuries suffered by the Grantee arising
out of the Subrecipient's breach of this section.
C. Grantee Recognition. The Subrecipient shall insure recognition of the role of the Grantee in the
Subrecipient's performance of the activities through this Agreement. Any activity, facility, or item
performed or utilized pursuant to this Agreement shall be prominently labeled as to its funding
source. In addition, the Subrecipient shall include a reference to the support provided in this
Agreement in all publications made possible with funds made available under this Agreement.
D. Amendment.
1. The Grantee or the Subrecipient may amend this Agreement at any time provided that such
amendment makes specific reference to this Agreement; is executed in writing and signed
by a duly authorized representative of each Party; and is approved by the Grantee's
governing body.
2. The Grantee may, in its discretion, amend this Agreement to comply with federal, state, or
local laws, regulations, guidelines, or policies, except that if any such amendment results in
a change in the funding or the Activities under this Agreement, such amendment may be
Subrecipient Agreement - 4 - CAO: 2/24/2021
made only by written amendment signed by both the Grantee and the Subrecipient as
otherwise required by this Agreement.
VII. INDEMNIFICATION & INSURANCE
A Indemnification, Duty to Defend, and Hold Harmless. The Subrecipient (including the
Subrecipient's agents, employees, and subcontractors, if any) shall hold harmless, defend, and
indemnify the Grantee, its officials, officers, agents, employees, and volunteers from and against
any and all claims, demands, actions, causes of action, proceedings (including but not limited
to legal and administrative proceedings of any kind), suits, fines, penalties, judgments, orders,
levies, costs, expenses, liabilities, losses, damages, or injuries, in law or equity, including without
limitation the payment of all consequential damages and attorney's fees and other related
litigation costs and expenses (collectively, "Claims"), of every nature caused by, arising out of,
or in connection with the Subrecipient's (including the Subrecipient's agents, employees, and
subcontractors, if any) performance of the Activities or its failure to comply with any of its
obligations contained in this Agreement, except where caused by the active negligence, sole
negligence, or willful misconduct of the Grantee. This provision shall survive the termination of
this Agreement.
B. Insurance.
1. The Subrecipient shall comply with the insurance requirements of 2 C.F.R. §§ 200.310 and
200.447.
2. The Subrecipient shall carry sufficient insurance coverage to protect contract assets from
loss due to theft, fraud, and undue physical damage.
3. The Subrecipient shall procure and maintain, at its own cost, during the entire term of this
Agreement, insurance against claims for injuries to persons or damages to property that
may arise from or in connection with the performance of the Activities, and the results of
such work, by the Subrecipient, its agents, representatives, employees, or subcontracts.
Insurance coverage shall be at least as broad as the following:
a. Commercial General Liability. Insurance Services Office ("ISO") Form CG 00 01
covering Commercial General Liability on an "occurrence" basis, including products and
completed operations, property damage, bodily injury, and personal & advertising injury,
with limits no less than $2,000,000 per occurrence, $4,000,000 general aggregate.
b. Automobile Liability. ISO Form CA 00 01 covering any auto (Code 1 ), or if the
Subrecipient has no owned autos, hired (Code 8) and non-owned autos (Code 9), with
limits no less than $1,000,000 per accident for bodily injury and property damage, unless
waived by the Grantee and approved in writing by the Grantee's Risk and Safety Division.
c. Workers' Compensation. Workers' Compensation as required by the state of California,
with Statutory Limits, and Employer's Liability Insurance with limits of no less than
$1,000,000 per accident for bodily injury or disease.
d. Professional Liability (Errors and Omissions). Professional Liability (Errors and
Omissions) appropriate to the Subrecipient's professions, with limits no less than
$2,000,000 per occurrence or claim, $2,000,000 aggregate.
Subrecipient Agreement CAO: 2/24/2021
e. If the Subrecipient maintains broader coverage and/or higher limits than the minimums
otherwise required by this Agreement, the Grantee requires and shall be entitled to the
broader coverage and/or the higher limits maintained by the Subrecipient.
4. Each insurance policy required by this Agreement must be acceptable to the Grantee's City
Attorney and shall meet the following requirements:
a. Acceptability of Insurers. Insurance coverage must be provided by an insurer authorized
to conduct business in the state of California with a current A. M. Best's rating of no less
than A-:VII, or as approved by the Grantee.
b. Additional Insured Status. Both the Commercial General Liability and the Automobile
liability policies must name the Grantee (including its officials, officers, agents,
employees, and volunteers) specifically as an additional insured under the policy on a
separate endorsement page. The Commercial General Liability additional insured
endorsement shall be at least as broad as ISO Form CG 20 10 11 85, or if not available,
through the addition of both CG 20 10, CG 20 26, CG 20 33, or CG 20 38, and CG 20
37 if a later edition is used. The Automobile Liability endorsement shall be at least as
b road as ISO Form CA 20 01.
c. Primary Coverage. The Subrecipient's insurance coverage shall be primary coverage
at least as broad as ISO CG 20 01 04 13 with respect to the Grantee, its officials, officers,
agents, employees, and volunteers. Any insurance or self-insurance maintained by the
Grantee, its officials, officers, agents, employees, or volunteers shall be in excess of the
Subrecipient's insurance and shall not contribute with it.
d. Notice of Cancellation. Each insurance policy shall p rovide that coverage shall not be
canceled, except with prior written notice to the Grantee.
e. Subcontractors. If applicable, the Subrecipient shall require and verify that all
subcontractors maintain insurance meeting all the requirements stated within this
Agreement, and the Subrecipient shall ensure that the Grantee (including its officials,
officers, agents, employees, and volunteers) is an additional insured of any insurance
required from a subcontractor.
f. Waiver of Subrogation. The Subrecipient hereby grants to the Grantee a waiver of any
right to subrogation that any insurer of the Subrecipient may acquire against the Grantee
by virtue of the payment of any loss under such insurance. The Subrecipient agrees to
obtain any endorsement that may be necessary to affect this waiver of subrogation, but
his subsection shall apply regardless of whether or not the Grantee has received a waiver
of subrogation endorsement from the insurer. Any Workers' Compensation policy
required by this Agreement shall be endorsed with a waiver of subrogation in favor of the
Grantee for all work performed by the Subrecipient, its agents, representatives,
employees, and subcontractors.
g. Self-Insurance. The Subrecipient may, with the Grantee's prior written consent, fulfill
some or all of the insurance requirements contained in this Agreement under a plan of
self-insurance. The Sub recipient shall only be permitted to utilize such self-insurance if,
in the opinion of the Grantee, the Subrecipient' s (i) net worth and (ii) reserves for
payment of claims of liability against the Subrecipient are sufficient to adequately
compensate for the lack of other insurance coverage required by this Agreement. The
Subrecipient's utilization of self-insurance shall not in any way limit the liabilities
assumed by the Subrecipient pursuant to this Agreement.
Subrecipient Agreement CAO: 2/24/2021
h. Self-Insured Retentions. Self-insured retentions must be declared to and approved by
this Grantee .
5. Verification of Coverage. At the time the Subrecipient executes this Agreement, the
Subrecipi ent shall provide the Grantee with original Certificates of Insurance including a l l
required amendatory endorsements ( o r copies o f the applicable policy language effecting
the insurance coverage required by this Agreement), which shall meet a l l requirements
under this Agreement. The Grantee reserves the right to requ i re complete, certified copies
of a l l required insurance policies, including endorsements required by this Agreement, at
any time.
6. Special Risks or Circumstances. The Grantee reserves the right, at any point during the
term of this Agreement, to modify the insurance requirements in this Agreement, including
l imits, based on the nature of the risk, prior experience, insurer, coverage, or other special
circumstances.
7 . No Limitation of Obligations. The insurance requirements i n this Agreement, including the
types and l imits of insurance coverage the Subrecipient must maintain, and any approval of
such insurance by the Grantee, are not intended to and sha l l not in any manner l imit or
qual ify the l iabi lities and obligations otherwise assumed by the Subrecipient pursuant to this
Agreement, including but not l imited to any provisions in this Agreement concerning
indemnification.
8 . Failure t o comply with any o f the insurance requirements in this Agreement, including but
not l imited to a lapse in any required insurance coverage during the term of this Agreement,
sha l l be a material breach of this Agreement. In the event that the Subrecipient fails to
comply with any such insurance requirements in this Agreement, in addition to any other
remedies the Grantee may have, the Grantee may, at its sole option, (i) immediatel y
terminate this Agreement, or ( i i ) order the Subrecipient t o stop work under this Agreement
and/or withhold any payment that becomes due to the Subrecipient until the Subrecipient
demonstrates compl iance with the insurance requirements in this Agreement.
VIII. TERMINATION
A. Suspension or Termination. The Grantee may suspend or terminate this Agreement if the
Subrecipient materially fails to comply with any terms of this Agreement, which may include
(but is not l imited to) the following:
1. Failure to comply with any of the federal, state, or local laws, regulations, executive
orders, H U D guidel ines, policies, or directives referred to herein, or any federal , state , or
local laws, regulations, executive orders, H UD guidelines, policies, or directives that may
become applicable to this Agreement at any time;
2. Fai lure, for any reason, of the Subrecipient to fulf i l l in a timely and proper manner its
obligations under this Agreement, as determined by Grantee in its sole discretion;
3. Ineffective or improper use of funds provided under this Agreement; or
4. Submission by the Subrecipient to the Grantee a report that is incorrect or incomplete in
any material respect.
Subrecipient Agreement - 7 - CAO: 2/24/2021
B. The Grantee shall have the right to terminate this Agreement immediately or withhold
payment of invoice for failure of the Subrecipient to comply with the terms and conditions of
this Agreement. If the Grantee decides to terminate this Agreement, after a full evaluation
of all circumstances has been completed, the Subrecipient shall, upon written request, have
the right to an appeal process. The Grantee shall attach a copy of the appeal process to
any termination notice.
C. If the Grantee finds that the Subrecipient has violated any term or condition of this
Agreement, the Subrecipient shall be required to:
1. Repay all monies received from the Grantee under this Agreement; and
2. Transfer possession of all materials and equipment purchased with grant money to the
Grantee.
D . In the case of early termination , the Grantee may make a final payment to the Subrecipient
upon receipt of a Final Report and invoices covering eligible costs incurred prior to such
termination. The total of all payments, includ ing the final payment, shall not exceed the
amount specified i n this Agreement.
E. Termination for Convenience. This Agreement may be terminated for convenience by either
Party, in whole or in part, by setting forth the reasons for such termination, the effective date
of such termination, and, in the case of partial termination, the portion to be terminated.
However, if in the case of a partial termination, the Grantee determines that the remaining
portion of the award will not accomplish the purpose for which the award was made, the
Grantee may terminate the Agreement in its entirety. Grantee and Subrecipient agree to
provide written notice to the other party within 30 days prior to the effective date of any
termination for convenience. In the event that H U D withdraws any portion of the City's ESGCV
funds, the City shall not be obligated to reimburse the Subrecipient for any activity
expense incurred and may recover reimbursed amounts already paid. The Grantee shall
notify the Subrecipient if such event by H UD occurs.
IX. ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS
A Financial Management.
1. Accounting Standards. The Subrecipient shall comply with 2 C.F. R. Part 200 and shall
adhere to the accounting principles and procedures required therein, includ ing following
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) as defined in 2 C.F.R. § 200.49. The
Subrecipient shall utilize adequate internal controls and maintain necessary source
d ocumentation for all costs incurred.
2. Cost Principles. The Subrecipient shall administer its program in conformance with 2 C . F . R.
Part 200, Subpart E. These principles shall be applied for all costs incurred , whether
charged on a d irect or indirect basis.
3. Separation of Accounts . All funds received by the Subrecipient from the Grantee pursuant
to this Agreement shall be maintained separate and apart from any other fund of the
Subrecipient, or of any principal or member of the Subrecipient, in an account in a federally
insured banking or savings and loan institution. No monies shall be withdrawn from such
account except for expenditures authorized by this Agreement.
Subrecipient Agreement - 8 - CAO: 2/24/2021
4. Audit of Account. The Grantee shal l include an audit of the account maintained by the
Subrecipient in the City's annual audit of all ESG-CV Funds pursuant to federal regulations
found in Title 24 of the Code of Federal Regulations and other applicable federal laws and
regulations.
B. Documentation and Record Keeping.
1 . Records and Reports to Be Maintained. The Subrecipient shal l maintain all records and
reports required by the regulations specified in 24 C.F. R. §§ 576.2 and 576.407, and 2
C.F.R. Part 200, that are pertinent to the activities to be funded under this Agreement. Such
records and reports shal l include but shall not be l imited to:
a. records providing a full description of each activity undertaken;
b. records demonstrating that each activity undertaken meets one of the ESG-CV Eligible
Activities;
c. records documenting the number, race, and income level of persons and/or famil ies
participating in or benefiting from the Subrecipient's program;
d. records documenting the acquisition, improvement, use, or disposition of real property
or equipment acquired or improved with ESG-CV Funds;
e. records documenting compliance with the fair housing and equal opportunity
components of the program;
f. records documenting all ESG-CV Funds received from the Grantee;
g. records documenting expenses as identified in the Budget;
h . records documenting how duplication o f benefits has been avoided;
i . any other related records a s the Grantee may require;
j. Payment Request/Invoice Reports;
k. Quarterly Performance and Demographic Reports;
I. Final Evaluation Reports;
m. any such other reports as the Grantee may require;
5. Homeless Management Information System (HMIS). The Subrecipient shall adopt and
comply with all required Homeless Management Information System ("HMIS") policies and
procedures, including data col lection, privacy, and security requirements. The Subrecipient
shall use HMIS and other pertinent data collected in the community to assist with evaluating
ESG-CV activities within the context of broader system performance and to inform
subsequent ESG-CV program allocations. The Subrecipient shal l consistently collect and
report performance data to integrate into HMIS. The Subrecipient shall provide HMIS data
necessary for specific elements of the Consolidated Plan and Consolidated Annual
Performance Evaluation Report (CAPER).
Subrecipient Agreement - 9 - CAO: 2/24/2021
6 . Retention. The Subrecipient shall retain all financial records, supporting documents,
statistical records, and all other records pertinent to the Agreement for a period of four years.
The retention period begins on the date of the submission of the Grantee's annual
performance and evaluation report to HUD in which the activities assisted under the
Agreement are reported on for the final time. Notwithstanding the above, if there is litigation,
claims, audits, negotiations, or other actions that involve any of the records cited and that
have started before the expiration of the four-year period, then such records must be
retained until completion of the actions and resolution of all issues, or the expiration of the
four-year period, whichever occurs later.
3. Client Data. The Subrecipient shall maintain client data demonstrating client eligibility for
services provided. Such data shall include, but shall not be limited to, client name, address,
income level, or any other basis for determining eligibility, and description of service
provided. Such information shall be made available to the Grantee monitors or their
designees for review upon request.
4 . Disclosure. The Subrecipient understands that client information collected under this
Agreement is private and the use or disclosure of such information, when not directly
connected with the administration of the Grantee's or Subrecipient's responsibilities under
this Agreement, may be p rohibited by state and federal law unless written consent is
obtained from such person receiving service and, in the case of a minor, that of a responsible
parent/guardian.
6. Audits & Inspections. All Subrecipient records with respect to any matters covered by this
Agreement shall be made available to the Grantee, g rantor agency, and the Comptroller
General of the United States, or any of their authorized representatives, at any time during
normal business hours, as often as deemed necessary, to audit, examine, and make
excerpts or transcripts of all relevant data. Such monitoring activities may also include, but
are not limited to, questioning employees and participants in the program and entering any
premises or any site in which any of the services of activities funded by ESG-CV Funds are
conducted or in which any of the records of the Subrecipient are stored. In the event the
Subrecipient does not make any requested documents or records available within the City
of Escondido, California, the Subrecipient shall pay all necessary and reasonable expenses
incurred by the City in conducting any audit at the location where such documents or records
are maintained. Any deficiencies noted in audit reports must be fully cleared by the
Subrecipient within 30 days after receipt by the Subrecipient. Failure of the Subrecipient to
comply with the audit requirements within this Agreement shall constitute a violation of this
Agreement and may result in the withholding of future payments. The Subrecipient hereby
agrees to have an annual agency audit conducted in accordance with current Grantee policy
concerning subrecipient audits and 2 C.F.R. Part 200, Subpart F.
7. Additional Documentation. The Subrecipient shall provide further documentation as the
Grantee may request in relation to the requirements of this Agreement.
C . Reporting and Payment Procedures.
1. Program Income. Program income shall have the same meaning provided in 2 C.F.R. §
200.80. For purposes of ESG, p rogram income will also include any amount of a security or
utility deposit returned to the Subrecipient. The Subrecipient shall use all income received
from the ESG-CV Funds only for the same purposes for which the ESG-CV Funds may be
expended pursuant to the terms and conditions of this Agreement. Costs paid by program
income may count toward meeting the matching requirements, provided the costs are
Subrecipient Agreement - 1 0 - CAO: 2/24/2021
eligible ESG costs that supplement the program.
2. Indirect Costs. If indirect costs are charged, the Subrecipient shall develop an indirect cost
allocation plan for determining the Subrecipient's appropriate share of administrative costs
and shall submit such plan to the Grantee for approval, in a form specified by the Grantee.
3. Payment Procedures. The Grantee shall pay to the Subrecipient funds available under this
Agreement based upon information submitted by the Subrecipient and consistent with the
approved Budget and Grantee policy concerning payments. With the exception of certain
advances, payments shall only be made for eligible expenses actually incurred by the
Subrecipient, and not to exceed actual cash requirements. Payments shall be adjusted by
the Grantee in accordance with advance fund balances available in Subrecipient accounts.
in addition, the Grantee reserves the right to liquidate funds available under this Agreement
for costs incurred by the Grantee on behalf of the Subrecipient.
4. Progress Reports. The Subrecipient shall submit regular progress reports to the Grantee in
the form, content, and frequency required by the Grantee.
D . Use and Reversion of Assets.
1 . Upon the termination or expiration of the Term of this Agreement, the Subrecipient shall
transfer to the Grantee any ESG-CV Funds on hand at the time of such termination or
expiration, in addition to any accounts receivable attributable to the use of such ESG-CV
Funds.
2. Any real property under the Subrecipient's control that was acquired or improved in whole
or in part with ESG-CV Funds shall either be:
a. used to m eet one of the eligible activities stated in 24 C. F .R §§ 576. 1 00-1 09 until five
years after termination or expiration of the Term of this Agree ment, or for such longer
periods of time as determined to be appropriate by the Grantee; or
b. disposed of in a manner that results in the Grantee being reimbursed in the amount of
the current fair market value of the property less any portion of the value attributable to
expenditures of non-ESG-CV Funds for acquisition or improvement of the property.
Reimbursement to the Grantee shall not be required after the period specified in Section
IX(D)(2)(a) of this Agreement.
X. PERSONNEL & PARTICIPANT CONDITIONS
A. Civil Rights.
1 . Compliance. The Subrecipient agrees to comply with local and state civil rights laws and
regulations, including but not limited to the Unruh Civil Rights Act, California Civil Code § 5 1 ,
and the Fair Employment and Housing Act, California Government Code section 1 2900 et
seq. The Subrecipient also agrees to comply with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1 964, as
amended; Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1 968, as amended; Section 1 04(b) and Section
1 09 of Title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1 974, as amended
("HC DA"); Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1 973; the Americans with Disabilities Act
of 1 990; the Age Discrimination Act of 1 975; Executive Order 1 1 063, as amended; Executive
Order 1 1 246, as amended, and of the ruies, regulations, and relevant orders of the United
States Secretary of Labor.
Subrecipient Agreement - 1 1 - CAO: 2/24/2021
2. Land Covenants. This Agreement is subject to the requirements of Title VI of the Civil Rights
Act of 1964 (P.L. 88-352). In regard to the sale, lease, or other transfer of land acquired,
cleared, or improved with assistance provided under this Agreement, the Subrecipient shall
cause or require a covenant running with the land to be inserted within the deed or lease for
such transfer, prohibiting discrimination as herein defined, in the sale, lease, or rental, or in
the use or occupancy of such land, or in any improvements erected or to be erected thereon,
providing that the Grantee and the United States are beneficiaries of and entitled to enforce
such covenants. The Subrecipient, in undertaking its obligation to carry out the program
assisted hereunder, agrees to take such measures as are necessary to enforce such
covenant, and will not itself so discriminate.
3. Section 504. The Subrecipient agrees to comply with all federal regulations issued pursuant
to compliance with Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. § 794), which
prohibits discrimination against the individuals with disabilities or handicaps in any federally
assisted program. The Grantee shall provide the Subrecipient with any guidelines necessary
for compliance with that portion of the regulations in force during the term of this Agreement.
4. Executive Order 11246 (Nondiscrimination Provisions). During the performance of this
Agreement, the Subrecipient agrees as follows:
a. The Subrecipient will not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment
because of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression,
national origin, age, disability, or an individual's status in any group or class protected by
applicable federal, state, or local laws. The Subrecipient will take affirmative action to
ensure that applicants are employed, and that employees are treated during
employment, without regard to their race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender
identity or expression, national origin, age, disability, or an individual's status in any
group or class protected by applicable federal, state, or local laws. Such action shall
include, but not be limited to the following: employment, upgrading, demotion, or transfer;
recruitment or recruitment advertising; layoff or termination; rates of pay or other forms
of compensation; and selection for training, including apprenticeship. The Subrecipient
agrees to post in conspicuous places, available to employees and applicants for
employment, notices to be provided by the contracting officer setting forth the provisions
of this nondiscrimination clause.
b . The Subrecipient will, in all solicitations o r advancements for employees placed b y o r on
behalf of the Subrecipient, state that all qualified applicants will receive consideration for
employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender
identity or expression, national origin, age, disability, or an individual's status in any
group or class protected by applicable federal, state, or local laws.
c. The Subrecipient will not discharge or in any other manner discriminate against any
employee or applicant for employment because such employee or applicant has inquired
about, discussed, or disclosed the compensation of the employee or applicant or another
employee or applicant. This provision shall not apply to instances in which an employee
who has access to the compensation information of other employees or applicants as a
part of such employee's essential job functions discloses the compensation of such other
employees or applicants to individuals who do not otherwise have access to such
information, unless such disclosure is in response to a formal complaint or charge, in
furtherance of an investigation, proceeding, hearing, or action, including an investigation
conducted by the employer, or is consistent with the Subrecipient' s legal duty to furnish
information.
Subrecipient Agreement - 1 2 - CAO: 2/24/2021
d. The Subrecipient will send to each labor union, or representative of workers with whom
the Subrecipient has a collective bargaining agreement or other contract or other
understanding, a notice, to be provided by the agency contracting officer, advising the
labor union or worker's representative of the Subrecipient's commitments under Section
202 of Executive Order 1 1 246, as amended, and any other commitments hereunder, and
shal l post copies of the notice in conspicuous places available to employees and
applicants for employment.
e. The Subrecipient will comply with all prov1s1ons of Executive Order No. 1 1 246 of
September 24, 1 965, as amended, and of the rules, regulations, and relevant orders of
the United States Secretary of Labor.
f. The Subrecipient will furnish and cause each of its own subrecipients or subcontractors
to furnish all information and reports required by Executive Order 1 1 246, as amended;
the rules, regu lations, and relevant orders of the United States Secretary of Labor; and
any such information or reports otherwise required hereunder, and wil l permit access to
its books, records, and accounts by the Grantee, HUD or its agent, the United States
Secretary of Labor, or other authorized federal officials for purposes of investigation to
ascertain compliance with such rules, regu lations, and orders, and the provisions stated
herein.
g. In the event of the Subrecipient's noncompliance with the nondiscrimination clauses of
this Agreement or with any of such rules, regu lations, or orders, this Agreement may be
cancelled, terminated, or suspended in whole or in part and the Subrecipient may be
declared ineligible for further Government contracts in accordance with procedures
authorized in Executive Order 1 1 246 of September 24, 1 965, as amended, and such
other sanctions may be imposed and remedies invoked as provide in Executive Order
1 1 246 of September 24, 1 965, as amended, or by rule, regu lation, or order of the United
States Secretary of Labor, or as otherwise provided by law.
h. The Subrecipient will include the provisions of Section X(A)( 4 )(a)-(h) in every subcontract
or purchase order unless exempted by rules, regu lations, or orders of the United States
Secretary of Labor issued pursuant to Section 204 of Executive Order 1 1 246 of
September 24, 1 965, as amended, so that such provisions will be binding upon each
subcontractor or vendor. The Subrecipient will take such action with respect to any
subcontract or purchase order as may be directed by the United States Secretary of
Labor as a means of enforcing such provisions including sanctions for noncompliance.
Provided, however, that in the event the Subrecipient becomes involved in, or is
threatened with, litigation with a subcontractor or vendor as a result of such direction, the
Subrecipient may request the United States to enter into such litigation to protect the
interests of the United States.
B. Affirmative Action.
1 . Approved Plan. The Subrecipient agrees that it shall be committed to carry out pursuant to
the Grantee's specifications an Affirmative Action Program in keeping with the principles as
provided in President's Executive Order 1 1 246 of September 24, 1 965, as amended. The
Subrecipient shall submit a plan for an Affirmative Action Program for approval prior to the
award of funds, consistent with the Affirmative Action Program Policy articulated in
Exhi bit C , which i s attached hereto and incorporated herein by this reference.
2. Women- and Minority-Owned Businesses. The Subrecipient wil l use its best efforts to afford
small businesses, minority business enterprises, and women's business enterprises the
Subrecipient Agreement - 1 3 - CAO: 2/24/2021
maximum practicable opportunity to participate in the performance of this Agreement. As
used in this Agreement, the term "small business" shall mean a business that meets the
criteria set forth in Section 3(a) of the Small Business Act, as amended (15 U.S.C. § 632),
and the terms "m inority business enterprise" and "women's business enterprise" shall mean
a business at least 51 % owned and controlled by m inority group members or women, as
further defined in 15 U.S . C . § 632{n). For the purpose of this definition, "minority group
members" are such groups including but not lim ited to African Americans, H i spanic
Americans, Native Americans, Indian tribes, Asian Pacific Americans, Native Hawaiian
Organizations, and other m inorities. The Subrecipient may rely on written representations
by a business regarding its status as a women's business enterprise or minority business
enterprise in lieu of an independent investigation.
3. Prior Discrimination. The Subrecipient shall comply with 24 C.F.R. Part 6, with respect to
affirmative action necessary to overcome the effects of prior d iscrim ination, if any, and such
affirmative action shall be incorporated into the Subrecipient's Affirmative Action Program .
C. Employment Restrictions.
1. Prohibited Activity. The Subrecipient is prohibited from using funds provided herein or
personnel employed in the adm inistration of the program for political activities, inherently
religious activities, lobbying, political patronage, and nepotism activities.
2. Labor Standards.
a. The Subrecipient shall comply with the requirements of the Secretary of Labor in
accordance with the Davis-Bacon Act, as amended; the provisions of Contract Work
Hours and Safety Standards Act (40 U.S.C. § 327 et seq . ) ; and all other applicable
federal, state, and local laws and regulations pertaining to labor standards insofar as
those acts apply to the performance of this Agreement. The Subrecipient shall comply
with the Copeland Anti-Kick Back Act (18 U.S.C. § 874 et seq . ) and its implementing
regulations of the U. S. Department of Labor at 29 C.F.R. Part 5. The Subrecipient shall
maintain documentation that demonstrates compliance with hour and wage
requirements of this part. Such documentation shall be made available to the Grantee
for review upon request.
b. The Subrecipient, except with respect to the rehabilitation or construction of residential
property containing fewer than eight units, all contractors engaged under contracts in
excess of $2, 000 for construction, renovation, or repair work f inanced i n whole or i n part
with assistance provided under this Agreement, shall comply with federal requirements
adopted by the Grantee pertaining to such contracts and with the applicable
requirements of the regulations of the Department of Labor, under 29 C.F.R. Parts 1, 3,
5 , and 7 governing the payment of wages and ratio of apprentices and trainees to journey
workers; provided that, if wage rates higher than those required under the regulations
are i mposed by state or local law, nothing hereunder is intended to relieve the
Subrecipient of its obligati on, if any, to require payment of the higher wage. The
Subrecipient shall cause or require to be inserted in full, in all such contracts subject to
such regulations , provisions meeting the requirements of this paragraph.
c. Workers' Compensation and Safety. The Subrecipient shall comply with all federal and
state workers' compensation and safety laws, including but not limited to the applicable
provisions of Divisions 4 and 5 of the California Labor Code and all amendments thereto,
and all s i m ilar and applicable state or federal acts or laws.
Subrecipient Agreement - 1 4 - CAO: 2/24/2021
3. Economic Opportunities for Low- and Very Low-Income Persons. The Subrecipient shall
ensure that employment and other economic opportunities generated by the program shall,
to the greatest extent feasible, be directed to low- and very-low-income persons, particularly
those who are recipients of government assistance for housing. Section 3 of the Housing
and Urban Development Act of 1968, 12 U.S.C. § 1701u , and regulations at 24 C.F. R. Part
135 apply to this Agreement, except that homeless individuals have priority over other
Section 3 residents in accordance with 24 C.F.R. § 576 .405(c).
D. Conduct.
1. Assignability. The Subrecipient shall not assign or transfer any interest in this Agreement
without the Grantee's prior written consent; provided, however, that claims for money due or
to become due to the Subrecipient from the Grantee under this Agreement may be assigned
to a bank, trust company, or other financial institution without such approval. Notice of any
such assignment or transfer shal l be furnished promptly to the Grantee.
2. Subcontracts.
a. Approvals. The Subrecipient shall not enter into any subcontracts with any agency or
individual in the performance of this Agreement without the Grantee's prior written
consent.
b. Monitoring. The Subrecipient shall monitor all subcontracted services on a regular basis
to assure contract compliance. Results of monitoring efforts shall be summarized in
written reports and supported with documented evidence of follow-up actions taken to
correct areas of noncompl iance.
c. Content. The Subrecipient shall cause all of the provisions of this Agreement in its
entirety to be included in and made a part of any subcontract executed in the
performance of this Agreement.
d. Selection Process. The Subrecipient shall undertake to ensure that all subcontracts let
in the performance of this Agreement shal l be awarded on a fai r and open competition
basis in accordance with applicable procurement requ irements. Executed copies of all
subcontracts shall be forwarded to the Grantee along with any documentation
concerning the selection process.
3. Hatch Act. The Subrecipient agrees that no funds provided, nor personnel employed under
this Agreement, shall be in any way or to any extent engaged in the conduct of political
activities in violation of Chapter 15 of Title V of the U.S.C.
4. Conflict of Interest. In the procurement of supplies, equipment, construction, and services
by the Subrecipient, the conflict of interest provisions in 2 C.F.R. §§ 200.317-326 and 24
C.F.R. § 576.404 shall apply.
5. Lobbying. The Subrecipient hereby certifies that:
a. No federal appropriated funds have been paid or wil l be paid, by or on behalf of the
Subrecipient, to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or
employee of any agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress,
or an employee of a Member of Congress in connection with the awarding of any federal
contract, the making of any federal grant, the making of any federal loan, the entering
into of any cooperative agreement, and the extension, continuation, renewal ,
Subrecipient Agreement - 1 5 - CAO: 2/24/2021
amendment, or modification of any federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative
agreement;
b. If any funds other than federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid to any
person for i nfluencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any agency, a
Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member
of Congress i n connection with this federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative
agreement, the Subrecipient will complete and submit Standard Form-LLL, "Disclosure
Form to Report Lobbying," i n accordance with its i nstructions; and
c. The Subrecipient will require that the certification language expressed i n subparagraph
(d) be i ncluded i n the award documents for all subawards at all tiers (including
subcontracts, subgrants, and contracts under grants, loans, and cooperative
agreements) and that all subrecipients shall certify and disclose accordingly:
d. Lobbying Certification. This certification is a material representation of fact upon which
reliance was placed when this transaction was made or entered i nto. Submission of this
certification is a prerequisite for making or entering into this transaction imposed by 31
U.S.C. § 1352. Any person who fails to file the required certification shall be subject to
a civil penalty of not less than $10,000 and not more than $100,000 for each such failure.
6. Copyright. If this Agreement results in the creation or production of any copyrightable work,
material, or i nvention, the Grantee and grantor agency reserves the right to a royalty-free,
non-exclusive, and i rrevocable license to reproduce, publish, or otherwise use, and to
authorize others to use, such work, material, or i nvention for governmental purposes.
7. Religious Activities. The Subrecipient agrees that funds provided under this Agreement shall
not be utilized for inherently religious activities, such as worship, religious instruction , or
proselytization, as part of the Subrecipient's program or services. If the Subrecipient
conducts such activities, the activities must be offered separately, in time or location, from
such programs or services, and participation must be voluntary for the participants. The
Subrecipient shall not, in providing program assistance, discrim inate against a program
participant or prospective program participant on the basis of religion or religious belief. If
the Subrecipient is a religious organization , it retains its independence from federal, state,
and local governments, and may continue to carry out its m ission, including the defin ition,
practice, and expression of its religious beliefs, provided that the religious organization does
not use direct ESG-CV Funds to support any inherently religious activities. The Subrecipient
agrees that rehabilitation of structures by the religious organization in connection with such
program must be i n sound accord with 24 C.F.R § 576.406.
8. Ineligibility of Subrecipients. The Subrecipient shall not use ESG-CV Funds directly or
i ndirectly in its operations or to employ, award contracts to, or otherwise engage the services
of or fund any contractor or subcontractor, during any period of disbarment, suspension, or
placement i n i neligibility status of the Subrecipient or such contractor or subcontractor under
the provisions of 24 C.F.R. Part 24.
XI. ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
A. Air and Water. The Subrecipient agrees to comply with the following requirements insofar as
they apply to the performance of this Agreement:
1 . Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. § 7401 et seq . , a s amended, and all regulations and guidelines
issued thereunder;
Subrecipient Agreement - 1 6 - CAO: 2/24/2021
XII.
2. Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1 251 et seq., as amended, and all
regulations and guidelines issued thereunder, including but not limited to the requirements
within 33 U.S.C. § 1 3 1 8 relating to inspection, monitoring , entry, reports, and information;
and
3. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regulations pursuant to 40 C.F. R. Part 50, as
amended .
B. Flood Disaster Protection. In accordance with the requirements of the Flood Disaster Protection
Act of 1 973 (42 U.S.C. § 400 1 ), the Subrecipient shall ensure that for activities located in an
area identified by the Federal Emergency Management Act (FEMA) as having special flood
hazards, flood insurance under the National Flood Insurance Program is obtained and
maintained as a condition of financial assistance for acquisition or construction purposes
(including rehabilitation).
C. Lead-Based Paint. The Subrecipient agrees that any construction or rehabilitation of residential
structures with assistance provided under this Agreement shall be subject to HUD Lead-Based
Paint Regulations at 24 C.F . R. Part 35, Subpart B. Such regulations requ ire that all owners,
prospective owners, and tenants of properties constructed prior to 1 978 be properly notified that
such properties may include lead-based paint. Such notification shall point out the hazards of
lead-based paint and explain the symptoms, treatment, and precautions that should be taken
when dealing with lead-based paint poisoning and the advisability and availability of blood lead
level screening for children under seven. The notice should also point out that if lead-based
paint is found on the property, abatement measures may be undertaken. The regulations further
require that, depending on the amount of federal funds applied to a property, paint testing, risk
assessment, treatment, and/or abatement may be conducted.
D. Historic Preservation. The Subrecipient agrees to comply with the Historic Preservation
requirements set forth in the National Historic Preservation Act of 1 966, 1 6 U.S.C. § 470, as
amended , and the procedures set forth in 36 C.F. R. Part 800, insofar as they apply to the
performance of this Agreement. In general, this requ ires concurrence from the State Historic
Preservation Officer for all rehabilitation and demolition of historic properties that are 50 years
old or older, or that are included on a federal, state, or local historic property list.
DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE. Throughout the Term of this Agreement, the Subrecipient shall
provide a drug-free workplace by:
B. Publishing a statement notifying employees that the unlawful manufacture, d istribution,
d ispensing , possession, or use of a controlled substance is prohibited in the Subrecipient's
workplace and specifying the actions that will be taken against employees for violation of
such prohibition.
C. Establishing an ongoing drug-free awareness program to inform employees about:
1 . the dangers of drug abuse in the workplace;
2. the Subrecipient's policy of maintaining a drug-free workplace;
3. any available drug counseling , rehabilitation, and employee assistance programs; and
4 . the penalties that may be imposed upon employees for drug abuse violations occurring
in the workplace.
Subrecipient Agreement - 1 7 - CAO: 2/24/2021
D. Requiring that each employee who is engaged in the performance of activities under the
Agreement be given a copy of the statement required by Section X l l (A) of this Agreement
and notifying such employee that, as a condition of employment, the employee will (i) abide
by the terms of the statement, and (ii) notify the Subrecipient and appropriate Grantee
officials in writing of his or her conviction for a violation of a criminal drug statute occurring
in the workplace no later than five calendar days after such conviction.
E. Notifying the Grantee and HUD, in writing, within 10 calendar days after receiving notice
from an employee under Section X l l (C) of this Agreement, or otherwise receiving actual
notice of such conviction. Employers of convicted employees must provide notice, including
position title, to every grant officer or other designee on whose grant activity the convicted
employee was working, unless the federal agency has designated a central point for the
receipt of such notices. Notice shall include the identification number of each affected grant.
F. Within 30 days of receiving notice of any violation, the Subrecipient shall take appropriate
personnel action against the applicable employee, up to and including termination, and
requiring each such employee to participate satisfactorily in a drug abuse assistance or
rehabilitation program approved for such purposes by a federal, state, or local health, law
enforcement, or other appropriate agency.
G. For the purposes of this Section XII, "employee" shal l mean a person directly engaged in the
performance of work under this Agreement, including (i) all "direct charge" employees; (ii) all
"indirect charge" employees, unless their impact or involvement is insignificant to the
performance of work under this Agreement; and (iii) temporary personnel and consultants
who are directly engaged in the performance of work under this Agreement and on the
Subrecipient's payroll.
XIII. MISCELLANEOUS
A. Severability. This Agreement shal l be performed and shall be enforceable to the full extent
allowed by applicable law, and the i llegality, invalidity, waiver, or unenforceability of any
provisions of this Agreement shal l not affect the legality, validity, applicabil ity, or
enforceability of the remaining provisions of this Agreement.
B. Merger Clause. This Agreement, together with its attachments or other documents
described or incorporated herein, if any, constitutes the entire agreement and understanding
of the Parties concerning the subject of this Agreement and supersedes and replaces all
prior negotiations, understandings, or proposed agreements, written or oral , except as
otherwise provided herein. in the event of any conflict between the provisions of this
Agreement and any of its attachments or related documents, if any, the provisions of this
Agreement shall prevail.
C. Governing Law. This Agreement and all rights and obligations arising out of it shall be
construed in accordance with the laws of the State of California. Venue for any action arising
from this Agreement shall be conducted only in the state or federal courts of San Diego
County, California.
D. Anti-Waiver Clause. None of the provisions of this Agreement shall be waived by the
Grantee because of previous failure to insist upon strict performance, nor shall any provision
be waived because any other provision has been waived by the Grantee, in whole or in part.
Subrecipient Agreement - 1 8 - CAO: 2/24/2021
E. Attorney's Fees and Costs. In any action to enforce the terms and conditions of this
Agreement, the p revailing party shall be entitled to reasonable attorney's fees and costs.
F. Multiple Copies of Agreements/Counterparts. This Agreement may be executed on
separate counterparts, each of which shall be an original and all of which taken together
shall constitute one and the same instrument. Delivery of an executed signature page of
this Agreement by electronic means, including an attachment to an email, shall be effective
as delivery of an executed original.
G. P rovisions Cumulative. The p rovisions in this Agreement are cumulative to, in addition to,
and not in limitation of any other rights or remedies available to the Grantee.
H. Business License. The Subrecipient shall obtain a City of Escondido Business License prior
to execution of this Agreement and shall maintain such Business License throughout the
term of this Agreement.
I. Compliance with Laws, Permits, and Licenses. The Subrecipient shall keep itself informed
of and comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, statutes, codes, ordinances,
regulations, rules, and other legal requirements in effect during the term of this Agreement,
including but not limited to any such laws, statutes, codes, ordinances, regulations, and other
legal requirements expressly referenced in this Agreement. The Subrecipient shall obtain
any and all permits, licenses, and other authorizations necessary to perform the Activities.
Neither the Grantee, nor any elected or appointed boards, officers, officials, employees, or
agents of the Grantee, shall be liable, at law o r in equity, as a result of any failure of the
Subrecipient to comply with this paragraph.
J. Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986. The Subrecipient shall keep itself informed of
and shall comply with the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 ("IRCA") . The
Subrecipient represents and warrants that all of its employees and the employees of any
subcontractor retained by the Subrecipient who perform any of the activities under this
Agreement, are and will be authorized to perform such activities in full compliance with the
!RCA. The Subrecipient affirms that as a licensed employer in the State of California, all
new employees must produce proof of eligibility to work in the United States within the first
three days of employment and that only employees legally eligible to work in the United
States will perform the activities under this Agreement. The Subrecipient agrees to comply
with the IRCA before commencing any activities under this Agreement, and continuously
throughout the performance of such activities and the Term of this Agreement.
K. Effective Date. Unless a different date is provided in this Agreement, the effective date of
this Agreement shall be the latest date of execution set forth by the names of the signatories
below.
(SIGNATURE PAGE FOLLOWS)
Subrecipient Agreement - 1 9 - CAO: 2/24/202 1
H􀂺 VVIT/,J E :SS VVfif_ f:.: t, CYF t􀂻􀂼is ,J.91 (􀂽2: nent i􀂾. SH\'t:cuir!d
n 1prf?􀂿􀃀r::nb:1Uve:;; ::s of H112 ENectivG: f),3tt:: .
APP RCJ \/F: D AS ··o FORM.
·)1􀀉 f i('. £ ')F -r .--::: c :rv ,t􀃁·rTon:, .. ;_:y
,\it'.': HA£i. Ft, f•.􀃂CGlJl MESS, G·1y Aiic1,e;,
IN WITNESS W HEREOF, this Agreement is executed by the Parties or their duly authorized
representatives as of the Effective Date.
Date:
Date: July 1 5, 2021
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
OFFICE OF THE C I TY ATTORNEY
MICHAEL R. MCGUINNESS, City Attorney
By: ___________ _
CITY OF ESCONDIDO
Michael Strong
Director of Community Development
=􀑔
OMMUN l
?,
RVICES, INC.
􀈎Signat
Rev. Margaret Decker, Chair , Board of Directors
Name & Title (please print)
THE CITY OF ESCON D I DO DOES NOT DIS C R I M I NATE AGA I NST QUAL I F I E D PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.
Subrecipient Agreement - 20 - CAO: 2/24/2021
EXH I B I T A
Scope of Work
C o m m u n ity Services, I n c. - Ma nagement Services
A. G e ne r a l .
I n te rfaith C om m u n ity S e rvices, I nc . , a C a lifornia n o n - p rofit corporation ("Contra ctor") w i l l
p rovi d e the C ity of E s co n d i d o , a C a l ifo r n i a m u n ic i p a l corporation ("City") w i t h homeless
o ut re a c h m a n ag e m e n t and street o u treach s e rvices to furthe r e n h ance t h e work of the existin g
Comm u n ity Oriente d P o l i c i n g a n d Problem S o l v i n g ("COP PS") u n it a n d p rovide services to
h o me l es s res i d ents i n E s co n d i d o .
Contractor w i l l p rovi d e essential street o ut re a c h s e rv ices for u ns heltered homeless i nd ividuals
i n the C ity of Escondido. Outreach services will generally include:
1 . Con necting unsheltered homeless i n d ividuals with emergency shelter, housing, and critical
services;
2. Connecting u nsheltered homeless i n dividuals with u rg ent, non-facility-based care to
u nsh eltered homeless i ndividuals who a re unwi l l i n g or u n a ble to access emergency shelter,
h o u s i n g , or an a p p ropriate health facility; and
3 . E ng agement, case m anagement, emergency h ealth services, emergency mental health
services, transportation , and services for homeless youth, victim services, and services for
people living with H IV ("Special Populations").
B. Locatio n .
Services p rovided b y Contractor will b e performed a t various locations wit h i n t h e City Escondido.
Services shall be n on-facil ity-based .
C . Homeless Case Services.
1 . Contractor shall recru it, h i re , a n d t ra i n a 70% full time e q uiva lent employee ("FTE")
Behavioral Health Clin ician ("Cl i n ician"). The Manager shall oversee the homeless case
m a n agement services. The Manager m u st be a socia l worker with t h e fo l l o w i n g minimum
q ua lifications:
a . Bachelor's degree i n Social Work, Psychology, or other b ehavioral h ealth
d isci p l i n e s ;
b . A n active State o f California l i cense i n social work;
c. Three years' experience provi d i ng vase management services; a n d
d . B i l i n g u a l (English/Spa n i s h ) p referre d .
2 . T h e C l i nician m u st be able t o pass a n Escond ido Police Department backgro u n d check.
3 . Contractor shall ensure that case management services shall be available 40 hours per
week, Monday t h rough Friday, e i g ht h o u rs per day. Contractor m ust ensure that case
m anagement s e rvices are also ava i lable on occasional n ig hts and weekend as may be
req u i re d .
4. T h e Clin ician shall provide d irect services to homeless c l ients and recently housed i n d ividuals
a n d families, i ncluding but not l i m ited to:
a. I ntake, assessment, and case management; and
Subrecipient Agreement - 21 - CAO: 2/24/2021
b. Client advocacy (e.g. resources and referrals) with the goal of supporting client selfsufficiency.
5. The Clinician shall work in collaboration with the City's COPPS unit to further enhance the
work of the existing COPPS unit and provide comprehensive services to homeless residents
in the City.
6. The Clinician's responsibilities include, but are not limited to:
a. Collaborate with the City's COPPS unit, the Housing and Neighborhood Services
Manager, City departments and staff, other government agencies, and Escondido faith
centers, service clubs, businesses, nonprofit organizations, and community members;
b. Assist in the development of housing-focused outreach approaches, to include
providing program materials and referral training sessions to homeless-focused
community partners and shelter services (e.g. outreach to motels, churches, downtown
merchants, and community members);
c. Develop and implement creative, trusting client service engagement opportunities for
homeless individuals and families on the streets by reaching out to those that are
currently not being served or are underserved by existing community service delivery
systems;
d. Build trust relationships and leverage motivational interventions for the City's homeless
residents that facilitate acceptance of care for their needs, access to services, and
resources, encouraging them to become integrated into services, while providing
support and guidance as they transition from street to shelter;
e. Create a platform for business owners and community members to report homeless
activity in an area. The platform must provide business owners and community
members the ability to share the location of homeless activity, describe or identify the
activity of concern, the reporter's contact information, and follow-up information if they
choose. The platform must provide homeless outreach teams information necessary to
support team deployment, engagement, efforts to target reported homeless activity, and
follow-up with community members if requested. Homeless outreach responses must
remain focused on service engagement, community education, and information for
business owners. Contractor will not engage in activities seen as enforcement;
f. Facilitate and maintain community relationships to create individualized referral
pathways for homeless residents into those programs and services needed to fulfill their
case plan;
g . Engage with the Bridge to Housing Network of homeless service and shelter providers;
h. Assist with screening of potential clients for the homelessness prevention and rapid
rehousing programs;
i. Research and assist in implementing best practices on street outreach to assist
homeless community members in acquiring self-sufficiency and stable housing;
j. Help develop, implement, and support a comprehensive, layered collaboration with all
stakeholders, elected officials, City staff, businesses, service clubs, nonprofit agencies,
other government agencies, faith centers, and private community activists to support
efforts to prevent, reduce, and end homelessness in the City;
k. Complete a comprehensive case management assessment for each homeless client
by developing a detailed case plan that includes identifying barriers to housing. The
plan shall include a timeline and measures for each goal and shall be updated to
Subrecipient Agreement • 22 - CAO: 2/24/2021
monitor progress towards goals as the client's needs change at least every 90 days
or as changes occur in client's progress;
I. Obtain signed multi-agency release of information agreements in order to connect
clients to i nternal and external partner programs and serv ices ;
m. Enter client level data through the Homeless Management Information System
("HMIS"), Clarity, as wel l as service provider's additional client assessment and
tracking tools;
n. Connect homeless clients to housing, medical, mental health, addiction and recovery
services, food, clothing, transportation, employment, Social Security and Social
Security Disability assistance, and financial services based on the client's individual
plan;
o. Assist homeless clients in enrolling in mainstream benefits and obtain identification (e.g.
California Driver's License, California Identification Card and/or Social Security card);
p. Assist homeless clients in identifying housing options based on the individualized plan,
and work to obtain and maintain permanent housing with the client for a period of
up to nine months after housing placement based;
q. Maintain regular communication, both written and verbal , with the COPPS Lieutenant
and the City's Housing & Neighborhood Services Manager;
r. Attend case management meetings with City staff and COPPS staff to review the
Manager's caseload;
s. Maintain accurate and thorough documentation of client meetings and interactions in
a timely manner, including conversations, and progress towards goals;
t. Maintain data on each program participant and program milestones, and provide
required reports along with the monthly invoice; and
u. Participate in the annual Point-in-Time Count as coordinated by the he Regional
Task Force on the Homeless ("RTFH").
7. Contractor will serve 1 50 i nd ividuals in the City who are experiencing homelessness.
Throughout the term of the City's agreement w ith Contractor, there will be a m inimum of
1 ,000 i nstances of services, 30 unsheltered persons w i l l receive placement in i nterim
housing, and 1 5 homeless persons shall enter permanent housi ng .
8. Contractor shal l furnish a l l general office supplies, printing costs, and postage associated
with normal office and service operations related to case management duties.
9. Contractor w i l l cooperate w ith all reasonable requests for i nformation and reporting
requirements from RTFH i ncluding:
a . Monthly invoices for services rendered ; and
b. Monthly Programmatic Reports of service will be due on o r before the 1 5th day of
the following month, including but not l imited to:
i . Number o f unduplicated homeless persons served;
i i. Number and types of unduplicated instances of services;
i i i . Number of case management plans created;
iv. Number of unduplicated homeless persons entering emergency
shelter/treatment facilities;
v. Number of unduplicated persons entering permanent housing;
vi . Number of calls and referrals from COPPS team, the City's Public Works
Department, community members and local businesses
Subrecipient Agreement - 23 - CAO: 2/24/2021
vii. Average number of encounters per client;
viii. Where unduplicated services are occurring; and
ix. Number of hours works and locations of work.
10. Contractor will also provide feedback on the clientele being served and successes and
challenges to outreach in order to continue to evolve City's Homeless Outreach programs.
11. At the request of the City, Contractor shall provide, at its own expense, a financial audit
prepared by a certified public accountant.
12. All records relating to the Contractor's services provided pursuant to its a greement with
the City must be retained for a minimum of five years after the termination of the
a greement. If any litigation, claim, negotiation, audit, monitoring, inspection or other
action commences before the expiration of the required five-year record retention period ,
all records must b e retained until completion o f the action and resolution o f all issues
which arise from it
D. Lim itations.
E .
The Clinician is an employee of the Contractor and no agency or employment relationship with
the City is created by the execution of Contractor's agreement with the City.
The term of this Agreement shall be from July i , 2 021 to June 30, 2022. All contract funds
shall be expended by June 30, 2022.
F. Payment and
The total contract price of the agreement between Contractor and the City as described herein shall
not exceed $78, 335. Invoices must be submitted monthly after the services have been performed ;
payments will be paid after all expense d ocumentation, requisite program participation, and
milestone report documents are reviewed , and within 30 d ays of receipt of invoice for those
services.
Subrecipient Agreement - 24 - CAO: 2/24/2021
EXH I B IT B
Budget
Interfa ith Community Services, Inc. - H omeless Case M an agement Services
P e rso n n e l Expenses Budget Allotment
Behavioral H ea lth Clinician with B e nefits
(0.70 FTE) $71, 2 1 5
I nd i rect { 10% fed era l d e m i n i m i s rate) $7, 120
Total $78,335
S u brecipient Agreement CAO: 2/24/202 1
EXHIBIT C
Affirmative Action Program Policy
Su brecipient Agreement - 26 - CAO: 2/24/2021
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PLAN
SUBRECIPIENT : Interfaith Community Services
STREET ADDRESS : 550 West Washington Avenue
CITY, STATE, ZIP: Escondido, CA 92025
TELEP HONE NUMBER: 760-489-6380 -------------------------
IRS/ID : 95 -3837714
1 . The Subrecipient named above is committed to a policy of Affirmative Action to ensure Equal
Employment Opportunity in response to Executive Orders 1 0925, 1 1 1 1 4, and 1 1 246, as
amended, and relevant requirements adopted by the City, including all provisions of the
Subrecipient Agreement concurrently entered into between the Subrecipient and the City.
2. The official designated by the S ubrecipient to be Equal Employment Officer 1s:
/Denni 5 4-L􀀅kJ􀀆􀀇 ct ·c
3 . The Subrecipient will document fully its affirmative actions, which will b e a t least as extensive
as the following:
a. The Subrecipient will not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment
because of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression,
national origin, age, disability, or an individual' s status in any group or class protected by
applicable federal, state, or local laws. The Subrecipient will take affirmative action to
ensure that applicants are employed, and employees are treated during employment,
without regard to their race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or
expression, national origin, age, disability, or an individual's status any group or class
protected by applicable federal, state, or local laws. Such action shall include, but not be
limited to the following: employment, upgrading, demotion, or transfer; recruitment or
recruitment advertising; layoff or termination; rates of pay or other forms of compensation;
and selection for training, including apprenticeship.
b. The Subrecipient will ensure and maintain a working environment free of harassment,
intimidation, and coercion at all sites and in all facilities at which the Subrecipient's
employees are assigned to work. The Subrecipient, where possible, will assign two or more
women to each construction project. The Subrecipient shall specifically ensure that all
foremen, superintendents, and other on-site supervisory personnel are aware of, and carry
out, the Subrecipient's obligation to maintain such a working environment, with specific
attention to minority or female individuals working at such sites or in such facilities.
c. The Subrecipient will establish and maintain a current list of minority and female
recruitment sources and provide written notification to minority and female recruitment
sources and to community organizations when the Subrecipient or its unions have
employment opportunities available and maintain a record of the organizations' responses.
Subrecipient Agreement - 27 - CAO: 2/24/2021
d. The Subrecipient will maintain a current file on the names, addresses, and telephone
numbers of each minority and female off-the-street applicant and minority organization and
of what action was taken with respect to each such individual. If such individual was sent
to the union hiring hall for referral and was not referred back to the Subrecipient by the
union or, if referred, not employed by the Subrecipient, this shall be documented in the file
with the reason therefore, along with whatever additional actions the Subrecipient may have
taken.
e. The Subrecipient will provide immediate written notification to the Director of Office of
Federal Contract Compliance Programs when the union or unions with which the
Subrecipient has a collective bargaining agreement has not referred to the Subrecipient a
minority person or woman sent by the Subrecipient, or when the Subrecipient has other
information that the union referral process has impeded the Subrecipient 's efforts to meet
its obligations.
f. The Subrecipient will develop on-the-job trammg opportunities and/or participate in
training programs for the area that expressly include minorities and women, including
upgrading programs and apprenticeship and trainee programs relevant to the Subrecipient
's employment needs, especially those programs fimded or approved by the Department of
Labor. The Subrecipient shall provide notice of these programs to the sources compiled
under subsection (b) above.
g. The Subrecipient will disseminate the Subrecipient 's Equal Employment Opportunity
policy by providing notice of the policy to unions and training programs and requesting
their cooperation in assisting the Subrecipient in meeting its Equal Employment
Opportunity obligations; by including the policy in any policy manual and collective
bargaining agreement; by publicizing the policy in the company newspaper, annual report,
and similar publications; by specific review of the policy with all management personnel
and with all minority and female employees at least once a year; and by posting the policy
on bulletin boards accessible to all employees at each location where construction work is
performed.
h. The Subrecipient will review, at least annually, the company's Equal Employment
Opportunity Policy and Affirmative Action obligations with all employees having any
responsibility for hiring, assignment layoff tennination, or other employment decisions,
including specific review of these items with on-site supervisory personnel including but
not limited to superintendents and general foremen, prior to the initiation of construction
work at any job site. A written record shall be made and maintained identifying the time
and place of these meetings, persons attending, subject matter discussed, and disposition of
the subject matter.
1. The Subrecipient will disseminate the Subrecipient's Equal Employment Opportunity
policy externally by including it in any advertising in the news media, specifically including
minority and female news media and providing written notification to and discussing the
Subrecipient's Equal Employment Opportunity policy with other Subrecipients and
Contractors with whom the Subrecipient does, or anticipates doing, business.
J. The Subrecipient will direct its recruitment efforts. both oral and written, to minority,
female, and community organizations, to schools with minority and female students. and
Su breci pient Agreement - 28 - CAO: 2/24/2021
to minority and female recruitment and training organizations serving the Subrecipient's
recruitment area and employment needs. Not later than one month prior to the date for the
acceptance of applications for apprenticeship or other training by any recruitment source,
the Subrecipient shalI send written notification to organizations such as the above,
describing the openings, screening procedures, and tests to be used in the selection process.
k. The Subrecipient will encourage present minority and female employees to recruit other
minority persons and women and where reasonable, provide after-school, summer, and
vacation employment to minority and female youth, both on the site and in other areas of a
Subrecipient's workforce.
1. The Subrecipient will validate all tests and other selection requirements where there is an
obligation to do so.
m. The Subrecipient will conduct, at least annually, an inventory and evaluation at least of all
minority and female personnel for promotional oppo1iunities and encourage these
employees to seek or to prepare for, through appropriate training, such opportunities.
n. The Subrecipient will ensure that seniority practices, job classifications, work assignments,
and other personnel practices do not have a discriminatory effect by continually monitoring
all personnel and employment-related activities to ensure that the Equal Employment
Opportunity policy, Affirmative Action policy, and the Subrecipient's related obligations
are being carried out.
o. The Subrecipient will ensure that all facilities and company activities are non-segregated
except that separate and single-user toilet and necessary changing facilities shall be
provided to assure privacy between the sexes.
p. The Subrecipient will document and maintain a record of all solicitations of offers for
subcontracts from minority and female construction contractors and suppliers, including
circulation of solicitations to minority and female contractor associations and other
business associations.
q. The Subrecipient will conduct a review, at least annually, of all supervisors' adherence to
and perfom1ance under the Subrecipient's Equal Employment Opportunity policy and
Affirmative Action obligations.
4. Su contractors, and related contractors sha l l maintain a l l required :r􀀵cords for a
per s, or until audited, and permit a ccess by tl􀀶 Cj to all ·ds.
Signed: --,,<-􀀉-t-..,N--- - --- -
Signed:
Print: 'D..
D. ated : -(., ,v--. \--_.;
(
Subrecipient Agreement
Print:
Dated:
- 29 -
Rev Meg Decker, Chair, Board of Directors
July 15, 2021
CAO: 2/24/2021