CITY OF CHULA VISTA CONTRACTOR/SERVICE PROVIDER SERVICES AGREEMENT WITH JACOBS AND CUSHMAN SAN DIEGO FOOD BANK TO PROVIDE FOOD SERVICES DUE TO THE PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY WITH RESPECT TO THE CORONAVIRUS DISEASE 2019 ( COVID-19 ) This Agreement is entered into effective as of November 16 , 2021 ( Effective Date ) by and between the City of Chula Vista , a chartered municipal corporation ( City ) and JACOBS AND CUSHMAN SAN DIEGO FOOD BANK , a California non-profit corporation ( Contractor/Service Provider ) ( collectively , the Parties and , individually , a Party ) with reference to the following facts : Recitals WHEREAS , on March 11 , 2021 , the United States Congress passed the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 ( ARPA ) , which provides fiscal relief funds to State and Local Governments , and other program areas aimed at mitigating the continuing effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic ; and , ; and , WHEREAS , ARPA is intended to provide support to local governments in responding to the impact of COVID-19 and in their efforts to contain COVID-19 in their communities , residents , and businesses ; and , WHEREAS , ARPA includes State and Local Fiscal Recovery Funds to support urgent COVID response efforts to decrease the spread of the virus ; to replace lost public sector revenue to strengthen support for vital public services ; to support immediate economic stabilization for households and businesses ; and to address systemic public health and economic challenges that have contributed to inequal impacts of the pandemic on certain populations ; and , WHEREAS , the City of Chula Vista will receive $ 57,535,251 in two tranches with $ 28,767,625 provided in May 2021 and the remaining $ 28,767,625 to be received twelve months later ; and , WHEREAS , the City Council intends to expend a portion of the first tranche of the Citys ARPA Funds in accordance with Federal Law and guidance , for the current critical needs and priorities including the provision of food services . WHEREAS , the Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance Number for the ARPA is 21.027 ; and WHEREAS , City is in need of a service provider to administer its program on the Citys behalf ; and WHEREAS , Contractor/Service Provider is duly licensed and/or has the necessary qualifications to provide such services for the Project ; and . WHEREAS , The Parties desire to establish the terms for the City to retain the Contractor/Service Provider in order to provide the services described herein ; and WHEREAS , Contractor/Service Provider warrants and represents that it is experienced and staffed in a 1 City of Chula Vista Agreement No . : 2021-125 Consultant Name : JACOBS AND CUSHMAN SAN DIEGO FOOD BANK 10/24/17 Rev . manner such that it can deliver the services required of Contractor/Service Provider to City in accordance with the time frames and the terms and conditions of this Agreement . 2 City of Chula Vista Agreement No . : 2021-125 Consultant Name : JACOBS AND CUSHMAN SAN DIEGO FOOD BANK 10/24/17 Rev . [ End of Recitals . Next Page Starts Obligatory Provisions . ] 3 City of Chula Vista Agreement No . : 2021-125 Consultant Name : JACOBS AND CUSHMAN SAN DIEGO FOOD BANK 10/24/17 Rev . Obligatory Provisions NOW , THEREFORE , in consideration of the above recitals , the covenants contained herein , and other good and valuable consideration , the receipt and sufficiency of which the Parties hereby acknowledge , City and Contractor/Service Provider hereby agree as follows : SERVICES Required Services . Contractor/Service Provider agrees to perform the services , and deliver to City the Deliverables ( if any ) described in the attached Exhibit A , incorporated into the Agreement by this reference , within the time frames set forth therein , time being of the essence for this Agreement . The services and/or Deliverables described in Exhibit A shall be referred to herein as the Required Services . Reductions in Scope of Work . City may independently , or upon request from Contractor/Service Provider , from time to time , reduce the Required Services to be performed by the Contractor/Service Provider under this Agreement . Upon doing so , City and Contractor/Service Provider agree to meet and confer in good faith for the purpose of negotiating a corresponding reduction in the compensation associated with the reduction . Additional Services . Subject to compliance with the Citys Charter , codes , policies , procedures and ordinances governing procurement and purchasing authority , City may request Contractor/Service Provider provide additional services related to the Required Services ( Additional Services ) . If so , City and Contractor/Service Provider agree to meet and confer in good faith for the purpose of negotiating an amendment to Exhibit A , to add the Additional Services . Unless otherwise agreed , compensation for the Additional Services shall be charged and paid consistent with the rates and terms already provided therein . Once added to Exhibit A , Additional Services shall also become Required Services for purposes of this Agreement . Standard of Care . Contractor/Service Provider expressly warrants and agrees that any and all Required Services hereunder shall be performed in accordance with the highest standard of care exercised by members of the profession currently practicing under similar conditions and in similar locations . No Waiver of Standard of Care . Where approval by City is required , it is understood to be conceptual approval only and does not relieve the Contractor/Service Provider of responsibility for complying with all laws , codes , industry standards , and liability for damages caused by negligent acts , errors , omissions , noncompliance with industry standards , or the willful misconduct of the Contractor/Service Provider or its subcontractors . Security for Performance . In the event that Exhibit A Section 4 indicates the need for Contractor/Service Provider to provide additional security for performance of its duties under this Agreement , Contractor/Service Provider shall provide such additional security prior to commencement of its Required Services in the form and on the terms prescribed on Exhibit A , or as otherwise prescribed by the City Attorney . 4 City of Chula Vista Agreement No . : 2021-125 Consultant Name : JACOBS AND CUSHMAN SAN DIEGO FOOD BANK 10/24/17 Rev . Compliance with Laws . In its performance of the Required Services , Contractor/Service Provider shall comply with any and all applicable federal , state and local laws , including the Chula Vista Municipal Code . Business License . Prior to commencement of work , Contractor/Service Provider shall obtain a business license from City . Subcontractors . Prior to commencement of any work , Contractor/Service Provider shall submit for Citys information and approval a list of any and all subcontractors to be used by Contractor/Service Provider in the performance of the Required Services . Contractor/Service Provider agrees to take appropriate measures necessary to ensure that all subcontractors and personnel utilized by the Contractor/Service Provider to complete its obligations under this Agreement comply with all applicable laws , regulations , ordinances , and policies , whether federal , state , or local . In addition , if any subcontractor is expected to fulfill any responsibilities of the Contractor/Service Provider under this Agreement , Contractor/Service Provider shall ensure that each and every subcontractor carries out the Contractor/Service Providers responsibilities as set forth in this Agreement . Term . This Agreement shall commence on the earlier to occur of the Effective Date or Contractor/Service Providers commencement of the Required Services hereunder , and shall terminate when the Parties have complied with all their obligations hereunder ; provided , however , provisions which expressly survive termination shall remain in effect . COMPENSATION General . For satisfactory performance of the Required Services , City agrees to compensate Contractor/Service Provider in the amount ( s ) and on the terms set forth in Exhibit A , Section 4 . Standard terms for billing and payment are set forth in this Section 2 . Detailed Invoicing . Contractor/Service Provider agrees to provide City with a detailed invoice for services performed each month , within thirty ( 30 ) days of the end of the month in which the services were performed , unless otherwise specified in Exhibit A. Invoicing shall begin on the first of the month following the Effective Date of the Agreement . All charges must be presented in a line item format with each task separately explained in reasonable detail . Each invoice shall include the current monthly amount being billed , the amount invoiced to date , and the remaining amount available under any approved budget . Contractor/Service Provider must obtain prior written authorization from City for any fees or expenses that exceed the estimated budget . Payment to Contractor/Service Provider . Upon receipt of a properly prepared invoice and confirmation that the Required Services detailed in the invoice have been satisfactorily

###

