AGREEMENT
BY AND BETWEEN
THE CITY OF NATIONAL CITY
AND
MCALISTER INSTITUTE FOR TREATMENT & EDUCATION, INC.
THIS AGREEMENT is entered into on this / ~ day of Avir~ S{} , 20 Jj_, by
and between the CITY OF NATIONAL CITY, a municipal corporation:(the "CITY"), and
MCALISTER INSTITUTE FOR TREATMENT & EDUCATION, INC. ("McAlister Institute"),
a California nonprofit corporation (the "CONSULTANT").
RECITALS
WHEREAS, the CITY desires to employ a CONSULTANT to provide homeless case
management and supportive services.
WHEREAS, the CITY has determined that the CONSULT ANT is qualified by experience
and ability to perform the services desired by the CITY, and the CONSULTANT is willing to
perform such services.
NOW, THEREFORE, THE PARTIES HERETO DO MUTUALLY AGREE AS
FOLLOWS:
1. ENGAGEMENT OF CONSULTANT. The CITY agrees to engage the
CONSULTANT to provide homeless case management services, and the CONSULTANT agrees
to perform the services set forth here in accordance with all terms and conditions contained herein.
The CONSULTANT represents that all services shall be performed directly by the
CONSULTANT or under direct supervision of the CONSULT ANT.
2. EFFECTIVE DATE AND LENGTH OF AGREEMENT. This Agreement will
become effective on July 1, 2021. The duration of this Agreement is for the period of July 1, 2021
through June 30, 2022. Completion dates or time durations for specific portions of the project are
set forth in Exhibit "A". This Agreement may be extended by mutual agreement upon the same
terms and conditions for an additional one (1) year term. The Parties may exercise up to three oneyear
extensions. Any extension of this Agreement must be approved by Resolution of the City of
National City.
3. SCOPE OF SERVICES. The CONSULTANT will perform services as set forth
in the attached Exhibit "A".
The CONSULT ANT shall be responsible for all research and reviews related to the
work and shall not rely on personnel of the CITY for such services, except as authorized in advance
by the CITY. The CONSULT ANT shall appear at meetings specified in Exhibit "A" to keep staff
and City Council advised of the progress on the project.
The CITY may unilaterally, or upon request from the CONSULTANT, from time
to time reduce or increase the Scope of Services to be performed by the CONSULT ANT under
this Agreement. Upon doing so, the CITY and the CONSULTANT agree to meet in good faith
and confer for the purpose of negotiating a corresponding reduction or mcrease m the
compensation associated with said change in services.
4. PROJECT COORDINATION AND SUPERVISION. The Neighborhood
Services Manager is hereby designated as the Project Coordinator for the CITY and will monitor
the progress and execution of this Agreement. The CONSULTANT shall assign a single Project
Director to provide supervision and have overall responsibility for the progress and execution of
this Agreement for the CONSULTANT. The South Bay Enhanced Services Center (SBESC)
Manager is thereby designated as the Project Director for the CONSULTANT.
5. COMPENSATION AND PAYMENT. The compensation for the
CONSULT ANT shall be based on monthly billings covering actual work performed. Billings shall
include labor classifications, respective rates, hours worked and also materials, if any. The total
cost for all work described in Exhibit "A" shall not exceed $313,532. Monthly invoices will be
processed for payment and remitted within thirty (30) days from receipt of invoice, provided that
work is accomplished consistent with Exhibit "A," as determined by the CITY.
The CONSULT ANT shall maintain all books, documents, papers, employee time
sheets, accounting records, and other evidence pertaining to costs incurred, and shall make such
materials available at its office at all reasonable times during the term of this Agreement and for
three (3) years from the date of final payment under this Agreement, for inspection by the CITY,
and for furnishing of copies to the CITY, if requested.
6. ACCEPT ABILITY OF WORK. The CITY shall decide any and all questions
which may arise as to the quality or acceptability of the services performed and the manner of
performance, the acceptable completion of this Agreement, and the amount of compensation due.
In the event the CONSULTANT and the CITY cannot agree to the quality or acceptability of the
work, the manner of performance and/or the compensation payable to the CONSULT ANT in this
Agreement, the CITY or the CONSULT ANT shall give to the other written notice. Within ten (10)
business days, the CONSULT ANT and the CITY shall each prepare a report which supports their
position and file the same with the other party. The CITY shall, with reasonable diligence,
determine the quality or acceptability of the work, the manner of performance and/or the
compensation payable to the CONSULTANT.
7. DISPOSITION AND OWNERSHIP OF DOCUMENTS. The Memoranda,
Reports, and other documents prepared by the CONSULT ANT for this project, whether paper or
electronic, shall: (1) be free from defects; (2) become the property of the CITY for use with respect
to this project; and (3) shall be turned over to the CITY upon completion of the project, or any
phase thereof, as contemplated by this Agreement.
Contemporaneously with the transfer of documents, the CONSULTANT hereby
assigns to the CITY, and CONSULTANT thereby expressly waives and disclaims any copyright
in, and the right to reproduce, all written material, drawings, plans, specifications, or other work
prepared under this Agreement, except upon the CITY'S prior authorization regarding
reproduction, which authorization shall not be unreasonably withheld. The CONSULTANT shall,
upon request of the CITY, execute any further document(s) necessary to further effectuate this
waiver and disclaimer.
The CONSULT ANT agrees that the CITY may use, reuse, alter, reproduce, modify,
assign, transfer, or in any other way, medium, or method utilize the CONSULTANT'S written
Standard Agreement
Revised January 2021
Page 2 of 12 City of National City and
McAlister Institute for Treatment & Education, Inc.
work product for the CITY'S purposes, and the CONSULTANT expressly waives and disclaims
any residual rights granted to it by Civil Code Sections 980 through 989 relating to intellectual
property and artistic works.
Any modification or reuse by the CITY of documents, drawings, or specifications
prepared by the CONSULT ANT shall relieve the CONSULT ANT from liability under Section 14,
but only with respect to the effect of the modification or reuse by the CITY, or for any liability to
the CITY should the documents be used by the CITY for some project other than what was
expressly agreed upon within the Scope of Services of this project, unless otherwise mutually
agreed.
CITY understands that services provided by CONSULTANT may be clinical in
nature, containing confidential, medically privileged or other privacy protected information. As
such, documents of a clinical nature are not subject to this paragraph.
8. INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR. Both parties hereto in the performance of
this Agreement will be acting in an independent capacity and not as agents, employees, partners,
or joint venturers with one another. Neither the CONSULTANT nor the CONSULTANT'S
employees are employees of the CITY, and are not entitled to any of the rights, benefits, or
privileges of the CITY'S employees, including but not limited to retirement, medical, unemployment,
or workers' compensation insurance.
This Agreement contemplates the personal services of the CONSULTANT and
the CONSULT ANT'S employees, and it is recognized by the parties that a substantial inducement
to the CITY for entering into this Agreement was, and is, the professional reputation and
competence of the CONSULTANT and its employees. Neither this Agreement, nor any interest
herein, may be assigned by the CONSULT ANT without the prior written consent of the CITY.
Nothing herein contained is intended to prevent the CONSULTANT from employing or hiring as
many employees, or SUBCONSULTANTS, as the CONSULTANT may deem necessary for the
proper and efficient performance of this Agreement. All agreements by CONSULTANT with its
SUBCONSULTANT(S) shall require the SUBCONSULTANT(S) to adhere to the applicable
terms of this Agreement.
9. CONTROL. Neither the CITY, nor its officers, agents, or employees shall have
any control over the conduct of the CONSULTANT or any of the CONSULTANT'S employees,
except as set forth in this Agreement. The CONSULTANT, or the CONSULTANT'S agents,
servants, or employees are not in any manner agents, servants, or employees of the CITY. The
CONSULTANT and its agents, servants, and employees are wholly independent from the CITY
and CONSULTANT'S obligations to the CITY are solely prescribed by this Agreement.
10. COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAW. The CONSULTANT, in the
performance of the services to be provided herein, shall comply with all applicable state and federal
statutes and regulations, and all applicable ordinances, rules, and regulations of the City of
National City, whether now in force or subsequently enacted. The CONSULTANT and each of its
SUBCONSUL T ANT(S), shall obtain and maintain a current City ofN ational City business license
prior to and during performance of any work pursuant to this Agreement.
11. LICENSES, PERMITS, ETC. The CONSULTANT represents and covenants
that it has all licenses, permits, qualifications, and approvals of whatever nature that are legally
Standard Agreement
Revised January 2021
Page 3 of 12 City of National City and
McAlister institute for Treatment & Education, Inc.
required to practice its profession. CONSULTANT must promptly produce a copy of any such
license, permit, or approval to CITY upon request. The CONSULTANT represents and covenants
that the CONSULT ANT shall, at its sole cost and expense, keep in effect at all times during the
term of this Agreement, any license, permit, or approval which is legally required for the
CONSULT ANT to practice its profession.
12. STANDARD OF CARE.
A. The CONSULTANT, in performing any services under this Agreement,
shall perform in a manner consistent with that level of care and skill ordinarily exercised by
members of the CONSULTANT'S trade or profession currently practicing under similar
conditions and in similar locations. The CONSULTANT shall take all special precautions
necessary to protect the CONSULTANT'S employees and members of the public from risk of
harm arising out of the nature of the work and/or the conditions of the work site.
B. Unless disclosed in writing prior to the date of this Agreement, the
CONSULTANT warrants to the CITY that it is not now, nor has it for the five (5) years preceding,
been debarred by a governmental agency or involved in debarment, arbitration or litigation
proceedings concerning the CONSULTANT'S professional performance or the furnishing of
materials or services relating thereto.
C. The CONSULTANT is responsible for identifying any unique products,
treatments, processes or materials whose availability is critical to the success of the project the
CONSULTANT has been retained to perform, within the time requirements of the CITY, or, when
no time is specified, then within a commercially reasonable time. Accordingly, unless the
CONSULTANT has notified the CITY otherwise, the CONSULT ANT warrants that all products,
materials, processes or treatments identified in the project documents prepared for the CITY are
reasonably commercially available. Any failure by the CONSULTANT to use due diligence under
this sub-section will render the CONSULT ANT liable to the CITY for any increased costs that
result from the CITY'S later inability to obtain the specified items or any reasonable substitute
within a price range that allows for project completion in the time frame specified or, when not
specified, then within a commercially reasonable time.
13. NON-DISCRIMINATION PROVISIONS. The CONSULTANT shall not
discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of age, race, color,
ancestry, religion, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, national origin, physical handicap, or
medical condition. The CONSULTANT will take positive action to ensure that applicants are
employed without regard to their age, race, color, ancestry, religion, sex, sexual orientation, marital
status, national origin, physical handicap, or medical condition. Such action shall include but not
be limited to the following: employment, upgrading, demotion, transfer, recruitment or recruitment
advertising, layoff or termination, rates of pay or other forms of compensation, and selection for
training, including apprenticeship. The CONSULTANT agrees to post in conspicuous places
available to employees and applicants for employment any notices provided by the CITY setting
forth the provisions of this non-discrimination clause.
14. CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION. The CITY may from time to time
communicate · to the CONSULT ANT certain confidential information to enable the
CONSULTANT to effectively perform the services to be provided herein. The CONSULTANT
shall treat all such information as confidential and shall not disclose any part thereof without the
prior written consent of the CITY. The CONSULTANT shall limit the use and circulation of such
Standard Agreement
Revised January 202 l
Page 4 of 12 City of National City and
McAlister Institute for Treatment & Education, Inc.
information, even within its own organization, to the extent necessary to perform the services to
be provided herein. The foregoing obligation of this Section 14, however, shall not apply to any
part of the information that (i) has been disclosed in publicly available sources of information; (ii)
is, through no fault of the CONSULTANT, hereafter disclosed in publicly available sources of
information; (iii) is already in the possession of the CONSULTANT without any obligation of
confidentiality; or (iv) has been or is hereafter rightfully disclosed to the CONSULTANT by a
third party, but only to the extent that the use or disclosure thereof has been or is rightfully
authorized by that third party.
The CONSULT ANT shall not disclose any reports, recommendations, conclusions
or other results of the services or the existence of the subject matter of this Agreement without the
prior written consent of the CITY. In its performance hereunder, the CONSULTANT shall comply
with all legal obligations it may now or hereafter have respecting the information or other property
of any other person, firm or corporation.
CONSULTANT shall be liable to CITY for any damages caused by breach of this
condition, pursuant to the provisions of Section 15.
15. INDEMNIFICATION AND HOLD HARMLESS. To the maximum extent
provided by law, The CONSULTANT agrees to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City of
National City, its officers, officials, agents, employees, and volunteers against and from any and
all liability, loss, damages to property, injuries to, or death of any person or persons, and all claims,
demands, suits, actions, proceedings, reasonable attorneys' fees, and defense costs, of any kind or
nature, including workers' compensation claims, of or by anyone whomsoever, resulting from or
arising out of the CONSULTANT'S performance or other obligations under this Agreement;
provided, however, that this indemnification and hold harmless shall not include any claims or
liability arising from the established sole negligence or willful misconduct of the CITY, its agents,
officers, employees or volunteers. CITY will cooperate reasonably in the defense of any action,
and CONSULTANT shall employ competent counsel, reasonably acceptable to the City Attorney.
The indemnity, defense, and hold harmless obligations contained herein shall
survive the termination of this Agreement for any alleged or actual omission, act, or negligence
under this Agreement that occurred during the term of this Agreement.
16. EMPLOYEE PAYMENTS AND INDEMNIFICATION.
16.1 PERS Eligibility Indemnification. If CONSULTANT's employee(s) providing
services under this Agreement claims, or is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction or the
California Public Employees Retirement System ("PERS") to be eligible for enrollment in PERS
of the CITY, CONSULTANT shall indemnify, defend, and hold harmless CITY for the payment
of any employer and employee contributions for PERS benefits on behalf of the employee as well
as for payment of any penalties and interest on such contributions which would otherwise be the
responsibility of the CITY.
CONSULTANT'S employees providing service under this Agreement shall not:
(1) qualify for any compensation and benefit under PERS; (2) be entitled to any benefits under
PERS; (3) enroll in PERS as an employee of CITY; (4) receive any employer contributions paid
by CITY for PERS benefits; or (5) be entitled to any other PERS-related benefit that would accrue
to a CITY employee. CONSULTANT's employees hereby waive any claims to benefits or
compensation described in this Section 16. This Section 16 applies to CONSULT ANT
Standard Agreement
Revised January 2021
Page 5 of 12 City of National City and
McAlister Institute for Treatment & Education, Inc.
notwithstanding any other agency, state or federal policy, rule, regulation, law or ordinance to the
contrary.
16.2 Limitation of CITY Liability. The payment made to CONSULTANT under this
Agreement shall be the full and complete compensation to which CONSULT ANT and
CONSULT ANT' s officers, employees, agents, and subcontractors are entitled for performance of
any work under this Agreement. Neither CONSULTANT nor CONSULTANT's officers,
employees, agents, and subcontractors are entitled to any salary or wages, or retirement, health,
leave or other fringe benefits applicable to CITY employees. The CITY will not make any federal
or state tax withholdings on behalf of CONSULTANT. The CITY shall not be required to pay any
workers' compensation insurance on behalf of CONS ULT ANT.
16.3 Indemnification for Employee Payments. CONSULTANT agrees to defend and
indemnify the CITY for any obligation, claim, suit, or demand for tax, retirement contribution
including any contribution to PERS, social security, salary or wages, overtime payment, or
workers' compensation payment which the CITY may be required to make on behalf of (1)
CONSULTANT, (2) any employee of CONSULTANT, or (3) any employee of CONSULTANT
construed to be an employee of the CITY, for work performed under this Agreement. This is a
continuing obligation that survives the termination of this Agreement.
17. WORKERS' COMPENSATION. The CONSULTANT shall comply with all of
the provisions of the Workers' Compensation Insurance and Safety Acts of the State of California,
the applicable provisions of Division 4 and 5 of the California Labor Code and all amendments
thereto; and all similar State or federal acts or laws applicable; and shall indemnify, and hold
harmless the CITY and its officers, employees, and volunteers from and against all claims,
demands, payments, suits, actions, proceedings, and judgments of every nature and description,
including reasonable attorney's fees and defense costs presented, brought or recovered against the
CITY or its officers, employees, or volunteers, for or on account of any liability under any of said
acts which may be incurred by reason of any work to be performed by the CONSULTANT under
this Agreement.
18. INSURANCE. The CONSULTANT, at its sole cost and expense, shall purchase
and maintain, and shall require its SUBCONSULTANT(S), when applicable, to purchase and
maintain throughout the term of this Agreement, the following insurance policies:
A. D If checked, Professional Liability Insurance ( errors and omissions)
with minimum limits of$1,000,000 per occurrence.
B. Automobile Insurance covering all bodily injury and property damage
incurred during the performance of this Agreement, with a minimum coverage of $1,000,000
combined single limit per accident. Such automobile insurance shall include owned, non-owned,
and hired vehicles. The policy shall name the CITY and its officers, agents, employees, and
volunteers as additional insureds, and a separate additional insured endorsement shall be provided.
C. Commercial General Liability Insurance, with minimum limits of either
$2,000,000 per occurrence and $4,000,000 aggregate, or $1,000,000 per occurrence and
$2,000,000 aggregate with a $2,000,000 umbrella policy, covering all bodily injury and property
damage arising out of its operations, work, or performance under this Agreement. The policy shall
name the CITY and its officers, agents, employees, and volunteers as additional insureds, and a
separate additional insured endorsement shall be provided. The general aggregate limit must apply
Standard Agreement
Revised January 2021
Page 6 of 12 City of National City and
McAlister Institute for Treatment & Education, Inc.
solely to this "project" or "location". The "project" or "location" should be noted with specificity
on an endorsement that shall be incorporated into the policy.
D. Workers' Compensation Insurance in an amount sufficient to meet
statutory requirements covering all of CONSULTANT'S employees and employers' liability
insurance with limits of at least $1,000,000 per accident. In addition, the policy shall be endorsed
with a waiver of subrogation in favor of the CITY. Said endorsement shall be provided prior to
commencement of work under this Agreement.
If CONSULT ANT has no employees subject to the California Workers'
Compensation and Labor laws, CONSULT ANT shall execute a Declaration to that effect. Said
Declaration shall be provided to CONSULTANT by CITY.
E. The aforesaid policies shall constitute primary insurance as to the CITY, its
officers, officials, employees, and volunteers, so that any other policies held by the CITY shall not
contribute to any loss under said insurance. Said policies shall provide for thirty (30) days prior
written notice to the CITY's Risk Manager, at the address listed in subsection G below, of
cancellation or material change.
F. If required insurance coverage is provided on a "claims made" rather than
"occurrence" form, the CONSULTANT shall maintain such insurance coverage for three years
after expiration of the term (and any extensions) of this Agreement. In addition, the "retro" date
must be on or before the date of this Agreement.
shall be:
G. The Certificate Holder for all policies of insurance required by this Section
City of National City
c/o Risk Manager
1243 National City Boulevard
National City, CA 91950-4397
H. Insurance shall be written with only insurers authorized to conduct business
in California that hold a current policy holder's alphabetic and financial size category rating of not
less than A: VII according to the current Best's Key Rating Guide, or a company of equal financial
stability that is approved by the CITY'S Risk Manager. In the event coverage is provided by nonadmitted
"surplus lines" carriers, they must be included on the most recent List of Approved
Surplus Line Insurers ("LASLI") and otherwise meet rating requirements.
I. This Agreement shall not take effect until certificate( s) or other sufficient
proof that these insurance provisions have been complied with, are filed with and approved by the
CITY'S Risk Manager. If the CONSULTANT does not keep all insurance policies required by
this Section 18 in full force _and effect at all times during the term of this Agreement, the CITY
may treat the failure to maintain the requisite insurance as a breach of this Agreement and terminate
the Agreement as provided herein.
J. All deductibles and self-insured retentions in excess of $10,000 must be
disclosed to and approved by the CITY. CITY reserves the right to modify the insurance
requirements of this Section 18, including limits, based on the nature of the risk, prior experience,
insurer, coverage, or other special circumstances.
K. If the CONSULT ANT maintains broader coverage or higher limits ( or both)
than the minimum limits shown above, the CITY shall be entitled to the broader coverage or higher
Standard Agreement
Revised January 202 l
Page 7 of 12 City of National City and
McAlister Institute for Treatment & Education, Inc.
limits ( or both) maintained by the CONSULT ANT. Any available insurance proceeds in excess of
the specified minimum limits of insurance and coverage shall be available to the CITY.
19. LEGAL FEES. If any party brings a suit or action against the other party arising
from any breach of any of the covenants or agreements or any inaccuracies in any of the
representations and warranties on the part of the other party arising out of this Agreement, then in
that event, the prevailing party in such action or dispute, whether by final judgment or out-of-court
settlement, shall be entitled to have and recover of and from the other party all costs and expenses
of suit, including attorneys ' fees.
For purposes of determining who is to be considered the prevailing party, it is stipulated
that attorney's fees incurred in the prosecution or defense of the action or suit shall not be
considered in determining the amount of the judgment or award. Attorney's fees to the prevailing
party if other than the CITY shall, in addition, be limited to the amount of attorney's fees incurred
by the CITY in its prosecution or defense of the action, irrespective of the actual amount of
attorney's fees incurred by the prevailing party.
20. TERMINATION.
A. This Agreement may be terminated with or without cause by either party.
Termination without cause shall be effective only upon 30-day's written notice. During said 30-
day period the CONSULT ANT shall perform all services in accordance with this Agreement.
B. This Agreement may also be terminated immediately by the CITY for cause
in the event of a material breach of this Agreement, misrepresentation by the CONSULTANT in
connection with the formation of this Agreement or the performance of services, or the failure to
perform services as directed by the CITY.
C. Termination with or without cause shall be effected by delivery of written
Notice of Termination as provided for herein.
D. In the event of termination, all finished or unfinished Memoranda Reports,
Maps, Drawings, Plans, Specifications and other documents prepared by the CONSULTANT,
whether paper or electronic, shall immediately become the property of and be delivered to the
CITY, and the CONSULTANT shall be entitled to receive just and equitable compensation for
any work satisfactorily completed on such documents and other materials up to the effective date
of the Notice of Termination, not to exceed the amounts payable hereunder, and less any damages
caused the CITY by the CONSULTANT'S breach, if any. Thereafter, ownership of said written
material shall vest in the CITY all rights set forth in Section 7.
E. The CITY further reserves the right to immediately terminate this
Agreement upon: (1) the filing of a petition in bankruptcy affecting the CONSULTANT; (2) a
reorganization of the CONSULT ANT for the benefit of creditors; or (3) a business reorganization,
change in business name or change in business status of the CONSULTANT.
21 . NOTICES. All notices or other communications required or permitted hereunder
shall be in writing, and shall be personally delivered; or sent by overnight mail (Federal Express
or the like); or sent by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested; or
sent by ordinary mail, postage prepaid; or telegraphed or cabled; or delivered or sent by telex,
telecopy, facsimile or fax; and shall be deemed received upon the earlier of (i) if personally
delivered, the date of delivery to the address of the person to receive such notice, (ii) if sent by
overnight mail, the business day following its deposit in such overnight mail facility, (iii) if mailed
by registered, certified or ordinary mail, five ( 5) days ( ten (10) days if the address is outside the
Standard Agreement
Revised January 2021
Page 8 of 12 City of National City and
McA!ister Institute for Treatment & Education, Inc.
State of California) after the date of deposit in a post office, mailbox, mail chute, or other like
facility regularly maintained by the United States Postal Service, (iv) if given by telegraph or cable,
when delivered to the telegraph company with charges prepaid, or (v) if given by telex, telecopy,
facsimile or fax, when sent. Any notice, request, demand, direction or other communication
delivered or sent as specified above shall be directed to the following persons:
To CITY:
Housing Programs Manager
Housing Authority
City of National City
1243 National City Boulevard
National City, CA 91950-4397
To CONSULTANT:
Chief Executive Officer
McAlister Institute for Treatment & Education, Inc.
1400 N. Johnson Avenue, Suite 101
El Cajon, CA 92020
Notice of change of address shall be given by written notice in the manner specified
in this Section. Rejection or other refusal to accept or the inability to deliver because of changed
address of which no notice was given shall be deemed to constitute receipt of the notice, demand,
request or communication sent. Any notice, request, demand, direction or other communication
sent by cable, telex, telecopy, facsimile or fax must be confirmed within forty-eight ( 48) hours by
letter mailed or delivered as specified in this Section.
22. CONFLICT OF INTEREST AND POLITICAL REFORM ACT
OBLIGATIONS. During the term of this Agreement, the CONSULTANT shall not perform
services of any kind for any person or entity whose interests conflict in any way with those of the
City of National City. The CONSULTANT also agrees not to specify any product, treatment,
process or material for the project in which the CONSULTANT has a material financial interest,
either direct or indirect, without first notifying the CITY of that fact. The CONSULTANT shall at
all times comply with the terms of the Political Reform Act and the National City Conflict of
Interest Code. The CONSULT ANT shall immediately disqualify itself and shall not use its official
position to influence in any way any matter coming before the CITY in which the CONSULTANT
has a financial interest as defined in Government Code Section 87103. The CONSULTANT
represents that it has no knowledge of any financial interests that would require it to disqualify
itself from any matter on which it might perform services for the CITY.
D If checked, the CONSULTANT shall comply with all of the reporting
requirements of the Political Reform Act and the National City Conflict of Interest Code.
Specifically, the CONSULTANT shall file a Statement of Economic Interests with the City Clerk
of the City of National City in a timely manner on forms which the CONSULTANT shall obtain
from the City Clerk.
The CONSULT ANT shall be strictly liable to the CITY for all damages, costs or
expenses the CITY may suffer by virtue of any violation of this Section 22 by the CONSULTANT.
Standard Agreement
Revised January 2021
Page 9 of 12 City of National City and
McAlister Institute for Treatment & Education, Inc.
23. PREVAILING WAGES. State prevailing wage rates may apply to work
performed under this Agreement. State prevailing wages rates apply to all public works contracts
as set forth in California Labor Code, including but not limited to, Sections 1720, 1720.2, 1720.3,
1720.4, and 1771. Consultant is solely responsible to determine if State prevailing wage rates apply
and, if applicable, pay such rates in accordance with all laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
24. ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.
A. Computation of Time Periods. If any date or time period provided for in
this Agreement is or ends on a Saturday, Sunday or federal, state or legal holiday, then such date
shall automatically be extended until 5:00 p.m. Pacific Time of the next day which is not a
Saturday, Sunday or federal, state, or legal holiday.
B. Counterparts. This Agreement may be executed in multiple counterparts,
each of which shall be deemed an original, but all of which, together, shall constitute but one and
the same instrument.
C. Captions. Any captions to, or headings of, the sections or subsections of
this Agreement are solely for the convenience of the parties hereto, are not a part of this
Agreement, and shall not be used for the interpretation or determination of the validity of this
Agreement or any provision hereof.
D. No Obligations to Third Parties. Except as otherwise expressly provided
herein, the execution and delivery of this Agreement shall not be deemed to confer any rights upon,
or obligate any of the parties hereto, to any person or entity other than the parties hereto.
E. Exhibits and Schedules. The Exhibits and Schedules attached hereto are
hereby incorporated herein by this reference for all purposes. To the extent any exhibits, schedules,
or provisions thereof conflict or are inconsistent with the terms and conditions contained in this
Agreement, the terms and conditions of this Agreement shall control.
F. Amendment to this Agreement. The terms of this Agreement may not be
modified or amended except by an instrument in writing executed by each of the parties hereto.
G. Assignment & Assumption of Rights. CONSULTANT shall not assign this
Agreement, in whole or in part, to any other party without first obtaining the written consent of
CITY.
H. Waiver. The waiver or failure to enforce any provision of this Agreement
shall not operate as a waiver of any future breach of any such provision or any other provision
hereof.
I. Applicable Law. This Agreement shall be governed by and construed in
accordance with the laws of the State of California. The venue for any legal action arising under
this Agreement shall be in either state or federal court in the County of San Diego, State of
California.
J. Audit. If this Agreement exceeds ten-thousand dollars ($10,000), the parties
shall be subject to the examination and audit of the State Auditor for a period of three (3) years
after final payment under the Agreement, per Government Code Section 8546.7.
K. Entire Agreement. This Agreement supersedes any prior agreements,
negotiations and communications, oral or written, and contains the entire agreement between the
parties as to the subject matter hereof. No subsequent agreement, representation, or promise made
by either party hereto, or by or to an employee, officer, agent or representative of any party hereto
shall be of any effect unless it is in writing and executed by the party to be bound thereby.
L. Successors and Assigns. This Agreement shall be binding upon and shall
inure to the benefit of the successors and assigns of the parties hereto.
Standard Agreement
Revised January 202 l
Page 10 of 12 City of National City and
McAlister Institute for Treatment & Education, Inc.
M. Subcontractors or Subconsultants. The CITY is engaging the services of the
CONSULTANT identified in this Agreement. The CONSULTANT shall not subcontract any
portion of the work, unless such subcontra~ting was part of the original proposal or is allowed by
the CITY in writing. In the event any portion of the work under this Agreement is subcontracted,
the subconsultant(s) shall be required to comply with and agree to, for the benefit of and in favor
of the CITY, both the insurance provisions in Section 18 and the indemnification and hold hannless
provision of Section 15 of this Agreement.
N. Construction. The parties acknowledge and agree that (i) each party is of
equal bargaining strength, (ii) each party has actively participated in the drafting, preparation and
negotiation of this Agreement, (iii) each such party has consulted with or has had the opportunity
to consult with its own, independent counsel and such other professional advisors as such party
has deemed appropriate, relative to any and all matters contemplated under this Agreement, (iv)
each party and such party's counsel and advisors have reviewed this Agreement, (v) each party
has agreed to enter into this Agreement following such review and the rendering of such advice,
and (vi) any rule or construction to the effect that ambiguities are to be resolved against the drafting
party shall not apply in the interpretation of this Agreement, or any portions hereof, or any
amendments hereto.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have executed this Agreement on the date
and year first above written.
CITY OF NATIONAL CITY
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
0~~.~ ~: ! ~riela M. ToIN
Deputy City Attorney
McALiSTER INSTITUTE FOR
TREATMENT & EDUCATION, INC.
(Corporatio11 - sig11a111res of two corporate officers required)
(Partnership or Sole proprietorship - one signature)
Jeanne McAlister
(Print)
Chief Executive Officer
(Title)
By:Oi~ (Name
Marisa Varond
(Print)
Executive Director
(Title)
Standard Agreement
Revised January 2021
Page 11 of 12 City of National City and
McAlistcr Institute for Treatment & Education, Inc.
AGREEMENT
BY AND BETWEEN
THE CITY OF NATIONAL CITY
AND
MCALISTER INSTITUTE FOR TREATMENT & EDUCATION, INC.
EXHIBIT A - SCOPE OF SERVICES
Homeless Case Management Services
The target population for the provision of Homeless Case Management Services are individuals
who are homeless or at risk of homelessness and who may have a serious mental illness and/or
substance use disorder. Homeless Case Managers designate a portion of their time for street
outreach, with the remaining time serving designated individuals with case management
services. This includes the following:
• Outreach and engagement in accordance with the San Diego Continuum of Care Street
Outreach Standards
• Screening for mental health, physical health, and substance use disorders
• Linkage to services which may include:
> Mental Health > Housing
> Substance Use Disorder > Employment Services
> Physical Health > Advocacy
> Social Services > Other services as indicated
• Referral and placement in emergency homeless shelters
• Short-term care coordination and case management with average caseload of 25 clients
• Coordination and collaboration with other providers to include psychiatric hospitals and
other fee-for-service (FFS) providers.
• Complete Vulnerability Index-Services Prioritization Decision Assistance tool (VI-SPADT)
for clients engaged for services.
• Data entered into the Homeless Management Information System (HMIS) Coordinated Entry
System (CES) and Services Point.
• Collaboration with Community Through Hope to address basic needs.
Homeless Case Managers (HCMs) respond to community requests, as directed by the City.
HCMs will be notified of any known environmental safety hazards at the time of the initial
referral and HCMs will notify the City of any safety concerns identified. HCMs will complete a
follow up report for the requested activities.
Reporting Requirements
Monthly and year-end summary report will be due 15 days following the end of the previous
month and 15 days following the end of the year. Report should be emailed to the City's Project
Coordinator. Monthly and year-end reports provided should include a Homeless Outreach Case
Management Data Collection Log and an Outreach Tracking Log.