AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE CITY OF LA MESA , CALIFORNIA , AND PEOPLE ASSISTING THE HOMELESS ( PATH ) FOR HOMELESS SERVICES UTILIZING COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT CORONAVIRUS FUNDS -th THIS AGREEMENT , entered this . day of No\/ev'Yl\o e. : r , 2020 by and between the City of La Mesa , a municipal corporation , hereinafter referred to as the `` CITY '' and People Assisting the Homeless ( PATH ) , herein referred to as the `` SUBRECIPIENT . '' WHEREAS , the CITY has applied for and received funds from the United States Government under Title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 , as amended ( HCD Act ) , Public Law 93-383 ( Catalogue of Federal Domestic Assistance # 14.218 ) ; WHEREAS , the CITY has adopted Resolution No . 2020-106 approving the commitment of Fiscal Year 2019-20 Community Development Block Grant Coronavirus ( CDBG-CV ) funds to be used by the SUBRECIPIENT in the performance of homeless services described in the Scope of Service ; and , WHEREAS , the SUBRECIPIENT represents that it can perform the work as set forth in the Scope of Service and that it has the expertise and experience to perform such work for the CITY . NOW , THEREFORE , the parties do mutually agree as follows : SECTION 1 : ENGAGEMENT OF CONSULTANT The City hereby agrees to engage SUBRECIPIENT and SUBRECIPIENT herebyagrees to perform the services set forth in this Agreement . The term of this Agreement is from November 1 , 2020 to October 31 , 2021 . SECTION 2 : SCOPE OF SERVICE A . Activities The SUBRECIPIENT shall provide a public service program in a manner satisfactory to the CITY and consistent with any standards required as a condition of providing these funds . Such program will include the following activities eligible under the Community Development Block Grant program : 1 . Assist people experiencing homelessness in La Mesa to prevent , prepare for , and respond to COVI D-19 using a person-centered approach that uses persistent and frequent engagement to connect unsheltered individuals with COVID-19 and housing-related services . 2 . Provide essential supplies to address basic needs such as food , hygienesupplies , and PPE . 3 . Provide case management services and enter individuals into the San DiegoRegional Coordinated Entry System . 4 . Provide counseling services in the field by a clinical outreach specialist before referring clients to additional support , as appropriate . 5 . Link clients to homeless , medical , mental health , and substance use treatment services and resources throughout La Mesa and nearby areas and provideclients with transportation as they seek services and care . 6 . For individuals displaying symptoms , obtain the services of field nurses through the Homeless Assistance Resource Team ( HART ) and provide testing referrals . 7 . Refer clients to temporary housing resources and work to move individuals off the streets into temporary or permanent housing . B . General Administration The SUBRECIPIENT shall maintain a full accounting of Community Development Block Grant funding as required by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development ( HUD ) and comply with all federal regulations for personnel management , audit and fund management . SUBRECIPIENT shall maintain and retain financial and personnel records and access to such records shall be made available to the CITY upon Request . C. National Objectives All activities funded with CDGB program funds must meet the National Objectives of benefit to low-and moderate-income persons . The SUBRECIPIENT certifies that the activities carried out under this Agreement will meet the national objective of benefiting low and moderate income people , by providing services to homeless persons . D. Goals and Performance Measures The SUBRECIPIENT agrees to serve at least 60 unduplicated clients and help a minimum of 30 % move indoors and 10 % into permanent homes , provide meaningful referrals to 50 % of individuals engaged in ongoing case management , and carry out a minimum of 250 client encounters with individuals to provide services and information related to COVID-19 , and basic nutrition and hygiene needs on a regular basis . E. Staffing The SUBRECIPIENT shall provide an outreach team comprised of a full-time outreach specialist and a full-time qualified clinical outreach specialist in coordination with City leadership . No substitutions in staffing will be made without prior written approval by the City . The City reserves the right to request specific qualifications for personnelsubstituted under this section and to terminate this Agreement if a suitable project manager is not available for substitution . F. Performance Monitoring The CITY will monitor the performance of the SUBRECIPIENT against goals and performance standards as stated above . Substandard performance as determined by the CITY will constitute noncompliance with this Agreement . If action to correct such substandard performance is not taken by the SUBRECIPIENT within a reasonable period of time after being notified by the CITY , contract suspension or termination procedures will be initiated . SECTION 3 : TIME OF PERFORMANCE Services of the SUBRECIPIENT shall start on November 1 , 2020 and end on October 31 , 2021 . The term of this Agreement and the provisions herein shall be extended to cover any additional time period during which the SUBRECIPIENT has not completed all of the tasks included in the Scope of Services , remains in control of CDBG funds or other CDBG assets , including program income . Subrecipient must provide Grantee written notification of the final day on which it controlled CDBG funds ( or other assets , including program income ) if the term is so extended and subrecipient does not renew or execute a new CDBG agreement with Grantee . SECTION 4 : PROJECT BUDGET Upon request , the SUBRECIPIENT shall provide a more detailed budget breakdown than the one provided in the initial application . The SUBRECIPIENT shall provide such supplementary budget information in a timely fashion in the form and content prescribed by the CITY . SECTION 5 : PAYMENT It is expressly agreed and understood that the total amount to be paid by the CITY under this Agreement shall not exceed two hundred sixty-two thousand four hundred sixteen dollars ( $ 262,416 ) . Request for payments shall be made on a monthly basis , not to exceed twenty-one thousand , eight hundred sixty-eight dollars ( $ 21,868.00 ) . Monthly payments will be made based on the submittal of a monthly financial statement , quarterly performance report , and letter of request signed by the executive office of the agency . Reimbursable expenses may include , but are not limited to salaries and benefits , rent and utilities , insurance , subscriptions and memberships , supplies , postage and printing . Payments may be contingent upon certification of the SUBRECIPIENT 's financial management system in accordance with the standards specified in 2 C.F.R . 200 , et . seq. , and , in particular , 2 C.F.R . 200.302 . Payment shall be contingent upon HUD 's delivery of payment to City . SECTION 6 : REPORTING REQUIREMENTS A . Quarterly Performance Report The Subrecipient shall submit a quarterly Performance Report ( July through September , October through December , January through March , April through June ) by the twentieth of the month following the close of the quarter . The quarterly report shall include a narrative and a summary of the following statistical data in the format provided by the CITY : 1 . The total number of clients served from the City of La Mesa . Count separately the number of first time clients and the repeat or continuing clients . 2 . The household characteristics of La Mesa clients served , for example , single person household , female head of household , or families . 3 . The number of persons served who earn 30 % or less than the current median income level for San Diego County established by HUD . 4 . The number of persons served who earn 50 % or less than the current median income level for San Diego County established by HUD . 5 . The number of persons served who earn 80 % or less than the current median income level for San Diego County established by HUD . 6 . The race and/or ethnicity of the La Mesa clients served by the program . 8 . Final Performance Report Within 16 days following the close of the contract period the SUBRECIPIENT shall submit a final report of achievements for the year , summarizing the range of activities provided and the cumulative totals of the clients served . SECTION 7 : NOTICES All communications to either party by the other shall be deemed given when made in writing and delivered or mailed to such party at its respective address as follows : CITY : City of La

###

