AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE CITY OF DEL MAR AND SAN DIEGO REGIONAL TASK FORCE ON THE HOMELESS FOR COMMUNITY SUPPORT PROGRAM FUNDING FOR FISCAL YEARS 2021-2022 and 2022-2023 This Agreement is made and entered into this 1st day of July , 2021 , by and between the City of Del Mar , a Charter City and a municipal corporation ( City ) , and the San Diego Regional Task Force on the Homeless ( RTFH ) ( collectively Parties ) . WHEREAS , the City desires to enter into an agreement with RTFH to provide services to Del Mar residents that address unmet community needs ( Services ) . Said work is to be performed in accordance with the terms and conditions set forth below and as described in the scope of services , attached hereto as Exhibit A and incorporated herein ; and WHEREAS , the City has determined that RTFH is qualified by experience and ability to perform the services desired by City , and RTFH is willing to perform such services ; and WHEREAS , RTFH will conduct all the work as described and detailed in this Agreement to be provided to the City . NOW , THEREFORE , the Parties hereto mutually covenant and agree with each other as follows : 1 . SERVICES . 1.1 Scope of Services . RTFH shall perform the Services as set forth in the written Scope of Services , attached hereto as Exhibit A and incorporated herein . Such services shall be provided at the direction of the City . 1.2 . City Modification of Scope of Services . City may order changes to the Scope of Services within the general scope of this Agreement consisting of additions , deletions , or other revisions . If such changes cause a change in the RTFHs cost of , or time required for , completion of the Scope of Services , an equitable adjustment to RTFHs compensation and/or contract time shall be made , subject to the Citys approval . All such changes shall be authorized in writing , executed by RTFH and City . If such a change results in an extension of the term of this Agreement or increases the maximum amount to be paid under this Agreement , no such change shall have any force or effect unless an amendment to this Agreement is approved by the City Council . 2 . DURATION OF AGREEMENT . 2.1 Term , Time for Performance . This Agreement shall be effective for a two-year period beginning on July 1 , 2021 , and ending June 30 , 2023 . Time is of the essence for this Agreement and each provision of this Agreement , unless otherwise specified in this Agreement . 2.2 Delay . Any delay occasioned by causes beyond the control of RTFH may merit an extension of time for the completion of the Scope of Services . When such delay occurs , RTFH shall immediately notify the Project Coordinator in writing of the cause and the extent of the delay , whereupon the Project Coordinator shall ascertain the facts and the extent of the delay and grant an extension of time for the completion of the Consulting Services when justified by the circumstances provided that no extension of time shall be granted which would extend the time for performance beyond the date specified in section 2.1 above . 2.3 Citys Right to Terminate for Default . Should RTFH be in default of any covenant or condition hereof , City may immediately terminate this Agreement for cause if RTFH fails to cure the default within ten ( 10 ) calendar days of receiving written notice of the default . 2.4 Citys Right to Terminate without Cause . Without limiting its rights in the event of RTFHs default , City may terminate this Agreement , without cause , by giving written notice to RTFH . Such termination shall be effective upon receipt of the written notice . RTFH shall be compensated for all effort and material expended on behalf of City under the terms of this Agreement , up to the effective date of termination . All personal property remaining in City facilities or on City property thirty ( 30 ) days after the expiration or termination of this Agreement shall be , at Citys election , considered the property of City . 3 . PERFORMANCE AFTER TERMINATION . Upon termination of this Agreement as provided herein , RTFH shall , within such reasonable time period as may be directed by City Manager , complete those items of work which are in various stages of completion and which City Manager determines are necessary to be completed by RTFH to allow the project to be completed in a timely , logical , and orderly manner . Upon termination , all finished or unfinished documents , data , studies , surveys , drawings , models , photographs , reports , and other materials prepared by RTFH shall be delivered to the City Manager , upon her request , as property of City . 4 . COMPENSATION . 4.1 Amount . Compensation to be provided to RTFH in the amount of $ 2,000 per year for both Fiscal Year ( FY ) 2021-2022 and FY 2022-2023 , for a combined total of $ 4,000 from the Citys FY 2021-2023 Community Support Program . The City shall provide the compensation in one lump sum payment per year at the beginning of each fiscal year . 4.2 Additional Services . City may , as the need arises or in the event of an emergency , request additional services of RTFH . Should such additional services be required , Compensation therefore shall be paid to the RTFH in accordance with Scope of Services contained in Exhibit A . City and RTFH shall agree to the costs prior to commencement of such work . 5 . INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR . RTFH is , for all purposes arising out of this Agreement , an independent contractor . The RTFH has and shall retain the right to exercise full control and supervision of all persons assisting the RTFH in the performance of said services hereunder , the City only being concerned with the finished results of the work being performed . Neither RTFH nor RTFHs employees shall in any event be entitled to any benefits to which City employees are entitled , including , but not limited to , overtime , any retirement benefits , workers compensation benefits , any injury leave or other leave benefits , RTFH being solely responsible for all such matters , as well as , compliance with social security and income tax withholding and all other regulations and laws governing such matters . 6 . STATEMENT OF EXPERIENCE . RTFH agrees that it has the financial resources , service experience , completion ability , personnel , and experience in dealing with public agencies necessary for performing the Scope of Services and that such performance shall be in accordance with the standards customarily adhered to by an experienced and competent RTFH using the degree of care and skill ordinarily exercised by reputable RTFHs practicing in the same field of service in the State of California . By executing this Agreement , RTFH represents that it has demonstrated trustworthiness and possesses the quality , fitness , and capacity to perform the Agreement in a manner satisfactory to City . Additionally , RTFH and all of RTFHs employees or agents shall secure and maintain in force such permits and licenses as are required by law in connection with the furnishing of services pursuant to this Agreement . 7 . AUDIT OF RECORDS . 7.1 At any time during normal business hours and as often as may be deemed necessary , the RTFH shall make available to a representative of City for examination all of its records with respect to all matters covered by this Agreement and shall permit City to audit , examine , and/or reproduce such records . RTFH shall retain such financial and program service records for at least four ( 4 ) years after termination or final payment under this Agreement . 7.2 The RTFH shall include the Citys right to audit under this section in any and all of their subcontracts , and shall ensure that these sections are binding upon all subcontractors . 8 . CONFIDENTIALITY . All services performed by RTFH , including , but not limited to , all drafts , data , correspondence , proposals , reports , research and estimates compiled or composed by RTFH , pursuant to this Agreement , are for the sole use of the City , its agents and employees . Neither the documents nor their contents shall be released to any third party without the prior written consent of the City . This provision does not apply to information that ( a ) was publicly known , or otherwise known to RTFH , at the time that

###

