AGREEMENT BY AND BETWEEN
THE CITY OF NATIONAL CITY
AND SOUTH BAY COMMUNITY SERVICES
FOR TENANT BASED RENTAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
This agreement ("Agreement"), is entered into this 5th day of December 2017, by
and between the City of National City, a municipal corporation (the "City"), and South Bay
Community Services, a 501(c)3 non-profit public benefit corporation (the "Subrecipient").
R E C I T A LS
WHEREAS, the City receives an annual allocation of Home Investment
Partnerships ("HOME"} program funds from the U.S. Dapartment of Housing and Urban
Development ("HUD") and has made an allocation of funds to establish a Tenant Based Rental
Assistance Program ("Program"); and
WHEREAS, the City has appropriated $188,147.42 in Fiscal Year 2017-2018 to assist
low and moderate income hornless persons and survivors of domestic violence at or under 80%
of Area Median Income by providing tenant based rental assistance to persons; and
WHEREAS, the Subrecipient responded to the City's HOME notice of funding
availability (NOFA) to deliver the City's Tenant Based Rental Assistance Program; and
WHEREAS, the Subrecipient has extensive knowledge and experience in
managing the delivery of HOME-funded down payment assistance programs; and
WHEREAS, the City has determined that the Subrecipient has the experience,
adequate staff capacity, and ability to deliver the services desired by the City in a professional ,.
and timely manner, and the Subrecipient is willing to perform such services.
NOW, THEREFORE, THE PARTIES HERETO DO MUTUALLY AGREE AS
FOLLOWS:
1. ENGAGEMENT OF SUBRECIPIENT. The City hereby agrees to engage
the Subrecipient and the Subrecipient hereby agrees to perform the services hereinafter set
forth in accordance with all terms and conditions contained herein. The Subrecipient represents
that all services required hereunder will be peiformed diiectly by the Subrecipient or under
direct supervision of the Subrecipient.
2. SCOPE OF SERVICES. The express purpose of this Contract is for the
City to provide the Subrecipient with ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY-EIGHT THOUSAND ONE
HUNDRED FORTY-SEVEN AND 42/100 DOLLARS ($188,147.42) of HOME Program funds. All
funds shall be used by Subrecipient solely to directly assist 19 low-income National City
homeless households with an emphasis on domestic violence survivors through the Tenant
Based Rental Assistance Program.
The Subrecipient will perform services as set forth in the attached Exhibit "A"
entitled Scope of Work and the National City HOME Tenant Based Rental Assistance Program
Manual, Exhibit "B", that provides a detailed description of the use of HOME funds under this
Agreement including a description of the project, roles and responsibilities, performance
standards, affordability, project requirements, and property standards.
The Subrecipient shall be responsible for all research an d reviews related to the
work and shall not rely on personnel of the City for such services, except as authorized in
advance by the City. The Subrecipient shall appear at Program related meetings and provide
reports as cited in Exhibit "A" to keep staff and City Council advised of the progress on the
Program.
3. PROJECT COORDINATION AND SUPERVISION.
Angelita Marchante, Community Development Specialist, is hereby designated
as the Program Coordinator for the City and will monitor the progress and execution of this
Agreement. The Subrecipient shall assign a single Program Director to provide supervision and
have overall responsibility for the progress and execution of this Agreement for the
Subrecipient.
4. COMPENSATION AND PAYMENT. The compensation for the
Subrecipient shall be based on quarterly billings covering actual work performed. The total cost
for all work described in Exhibit "A" shall not exceed the budget given in Exhibit "A". Invoices
will be processed for payment and remitted within thirty (30) days from receipt of invoice,
provided that work is accomplished consistent with Exhibit "A" as determined by the City.
The Subrecipient shall maintain all books, documents, papers, employee time
sheets, accounting records, and other evidence pertaining to costs incurred and shall make
such materials available at its office at all reasonable times during the term of this Agreement
and for five (5) years from the date of final payment under this Agreement, for inspection by the
City and for furnishing of copies to the City, if requested.
5. ACCEPTABILITY OF WORK. The City shall decide any and all
questions which may arise as to the. quality or acceptability of the services performed and the
manner of performance, the acceptable completion of this Agreement and the amount of
compensation due. In the event the Subrecipient and the City cannot agree to the quality or
acceptability of the work, the manner of performance and/or the compensation payable to the
Subrecipient in this Agreement, the City or the Subrecipient shall give to the other written notice.
Within ten (10) business days, the Subrecipient and the City shall each prepare a report which
supports their position and file the same with the other party. The City shall, with reasonable
diligence, determine the quality or acceptability of the work, the manner of performance and/or
the compensation payable to the Subrecipient.
6. LENGTH OF AGREEMENT. This contract begins on the date that it is
executed, with all funds being committed within twenty-four (24) months of the execution date.
All assistance is to be in the form of a grant and should be expended within thirty (30) months of
the execution date of this Contract.
7. DISPOSITION AND OWNERSHIP OF DOCUMENTS. All reports,
studies, information, data, statistics, forms, designs, plans, and procedures, systems and any
other materials or properties produced under this agreement shall be the sole and exclusive
property of the City. No such materials or properties produced in whole or in part under this
Agreement shall be subject to private use, copyrights, or patent rights by the Subrecipient in the
United States or in any other country without the express consent of the City. City shall have
unrestricted authority to publish, disclose (except as may be limited by the provisions of the
HOME Program Subrecipient Agreement
National City Tenant Based Rental Assistance Program
Page 2 of 13
Public Records Act), distribute, and otherwise use, copyright or patent, in whole or in part, any
such reports, studies, data, statistics, forms or other materials or properties produced under this
Agreement.
8. INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR. Both parties hereto in the performance
of this Agreement will be acting in an independent capacity and not as agents, employees,
partners or joint ventures with one another. Neither the Subrecipient nor the Subrecipient's
employees are employee of the City and are not entitled to any of the rights, benefits, or
privileges of the City's employees, including but not limited to retirement, medical, unemployment,
or workers' compensation insurance.
This Agreement contemplates the personal services of the Subrecipient and the
Subrecipient's employees, and it is recognized by the parties that a substantial inducement to
the City for entering into this Agreement was, and ·1s, the professional reputation and
competence of the Subrecipient and its employees. Neither this Agreement nor any interest
herein may be assigned by the Subrecipient without the prior written consent of the City.
Nothing herein contained is intended to prevent the Subrecipient from employing or hiring as
many employees, or subcontractors, as the Subrecipient may deem necessary for the proper
and efficient performance of this Agreement. All agreements by Subrecipient with its
subcontractor(s) shall require the subcontractor to adhere to the applicable terms of this
Agreement.
9. CONTROL. Neither the City nor its officers, agents or employees shall
have any control over the conduct of the Subrecipient or any of the Subrecipient's employees
except as herein set forth, and the Subrecipient expressly agrees not to represent that the
Subrecipient or the Subrecipient's agents, servants, or employees are in any manner agents,
servants or employees of the City, it being understood that the Subrecipient, its agents,
servants, and employees are as to the City wholly independent contractors and that the
Subrecipient's obligations to the City are solely 􀄞uch as are prescribed by this Agreement.
10. COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAW. The Subrecipient, in the
performance of the services to be provided herein, shall comply with all applicable State and
Federal statutes and regulations, and all applicable ordinances, rules and regulations of the City
of National City, whether now in force or subsequently enacted. The Subrecipient, and each of
its subcontractors, shall obtain and maintain a current City of National City business license
prior to and during performance of any work pursuant to this Agreement.
11. UCENSES, PERMITS, ETC. The Subrecipient represents and
covenants that it has all licenses, permits, qualifications, and approvals of whatever nature that
are legally required to practice its profession. The Subrecipient represents and covenants that
the Subrecipient shall, at its sole cost and expense, keep in effect at all times during the term of
this Agreement, any license, permit, or approval which is legally required for the Subrecipient to
practice its profession.
12. STANDARD OF CARE.
A. The Subrecipient, in performing any services under this
Agreement, shall perform in a manner consistent with that level of care and skill ordinarily
exercised by members of the Subrecipient's trade or profession currently practicing under
similar conditions and in similar locations. The Subrecipient shall take all special precautions
HOME Program Subrecipient Agreement
National City Tenant Based Rental Assistance Program
Page 3 of 13
necessary to protect the Subrecipient's employees ar.d members of the public from risk of harm
arising out of the nature of the work and/or the conditions of the work site.
B. Unless disclosed in writing prior to the date of this agreement, the
Subrecipient warrants to the City that it is not now, nor has it for the five (5) years preceding,
been debarred by a governmental agency or involved in debarment, arbitration or litigation
proceedings concerning the Subrecipient's professional performance or the furnishing of
materials or services relating thereto.
C. The Subrecipient is responsible for identifying any unique
products, treatments, processes or materials whose availability is critical to the success of the
project the Subrecipient has been retained to perform, within the time requirements of the City,
or, when no time is specified, then within a commercially reasonable time. Accordingly, unless
the Subrecipient has notified the City otherwise, the Subrecipient warrants that all products,
materials, processes or treatments identified in the project documents prepared for the City are
reasonably commercially available. Any failure by the Subrecipient to use due diligence under
this sub-paragraph will render the Subrecipient liable to the City for any increased costs that
result from the City's later inability to obtain the specified items or any reasonable substitute
within a price range that allows for project completion in the time frame specified or, when not
specified, then within a commercially reasonable time.
13. NON-DISCRIMINATION PROVISIONS. The Subrecipient shall not
discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of age, race, color,
ancestry, religion, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, national origin, physical handicap, or
medical condition. The Subrecipient will take positive action to insure that applicants are
employed without regard to their age, race, color, ancestry, religion, sex, sexual orientation,
marital status, national origin, physical handicap, or medical condition. Such action shall include
but not be limited to the following: employment, upgrading, demotion, transfer, recruitment or
recruitment advertising, layoff or termination, rates of pay or other forms of compensation, and
selection for training, including apprenticeship. The Subrecipient agrees to post in conspicuous
places available to employees and applicants for emp!oyment any notices provided by the City
setting forth the provisions of this non-discrimination clause.
14. CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION. The City may from time to time
communicate to the Subrecipient certain confidential information to enable the Subrecipient to
effectively perform the services to be provided herein. The Subrecipient shall treat all such
information as confidential and shall not disclose any part thereof without the prior written
consent of the City. The Subrecipient shall limit the use and circulation of such information,
even within its own organization, to the extent necessary to perform the services to be provided
herein. The foregoing obligation of this Section 13, however, shall not apply to any part of the
information that (i) has been disclosed in publicly available sources of information; (ii) is, through
no fault of the Subrecipient, hereafter disclosed in publicly available sources of information; (iii)
is already in the possession of the Subrecipient without any obligation of confidentiality; or (iv)
has been or is hereafter rightfully disclosed to the Subrecipient by a third party, but only to the
extent that the use or disclosure thereof has been or is rightfully authorized by that third party.
The Subrecipient shall not disclose any reports, recommendations, conclusions
or other results of the services or the existence of the subject matter of this Agreement without
the prior written consent of the City. In its performance hereunder, the Subrecipient shall comply
with all legal obligations it may now or hereafter have respecting the information or other
property of any other person, firm or corporation.
HOME Program Subrecipient Agreement
National City Tenant Based Rental Assistance Program
Page 4 of 13
Subrecipient shall be fiable to City for any damages caused by breach of this
condition, pursuant to the provisions of Section 14.
15. INDEMNIFICATION AND HOLD HARMLESS. The Subrecipient agrees
to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the City of National City, its officers and employees,
against and from any and all liability, loss, damages to property, injuries to, or death of any
person or persons, and all claims, demands, suits, actions, proceedings, reasonable attorneys'
fees, and defense costs, of any kind or nature, including workers' compensation claims, of or by
anyone whomsoever, resulting from or arising out of the Subrecipient's negligent performance
of this Agreement.
16. WORKERS' COMPENSATION. The Subrecipient shall comply with all of
the provisions of the Workers' Compensation Insurance and Safety Acts of the State of
California, the applicQble provisions of Division 4 and 5 of the California Govemment Code and
all amendments thereto; and all similar state or Federal acts or laws applicable; and shall
indemnify, and hold harmless the City and its officers, and employees from and against ail
claims, demands, payments, suits, actions, proceedings and judgments of every nature and
description, including reasonable attorney's fees and defense costs presented, brought or
recovered against the City or its officers, employees, or volunteers, for or on account of any
liability under any of said acts which may be incurred by reason of any work to be performed by
the Subrecipient under this Agreement.
17. INSURANCE. The Subrecipient, at its sole cost and expense, shall
purchase and maintain, and shall require its subrecipient(s), when applicable, to purchase and
maintain throughout the term of this Agreement, the following checked insurance policies:
A. D If checked, Professional Liability Insurance (errors and
omissions) with minimum limits of $1,000,000 per occurrence.
B. Automobile Insurance covering alt, bodily injury and property damage
incurred during the performance of this Agreement, with a minimum coverage of $1,000,000
combined single limit per accident. Such automobile insurance shall include owned, non-owned,
and hired vehicles ("any auto"). The policy shall name the CITY and its officers, agents and
employees as additional insureds, and a separate additional insured endorsement shall be
provided.
C. Commercial General Liability Insurance, with minimum limits of
$2,000,000 per occurrence and $4,000,000 aggregate, covering all bodily injury and property
damage arising out of its operations under this Agreement. The policy shall name the CITY and
its officers, agents and employees as additional insureds, and a separate additional insured
endorsement shall be provided. The general aggregate limit must apply solely to this "project"
or "location".
D. Workers' Compensation Insurance in an amount sufficient to meet
statutory requirements covering all of Subrecipient's employees and employers' liability
insurance with limits of at least $1,000,000 per accident. In addition, the policy shall be
endorsed with a waiver of subrogation in favor of the City. Said endorsement shall be provided
prior to commencement of work under this Agreement.
If Subrecipient has no employees subject to the California Workers'
Compensation and Labor laws, Subrecipient shall execute a Declaration to that effect. Said
Declaration shall be provided to Subrecipient by City.
E. The aforesaid policies shall constitute primary insurance as to the City, its
officers, employees, and volunteers, so that any other policies held by the City shall not
HOME Program Subrecipient Agreement
National City Tenant Based Rental Assistance Program
Page 5 of 13
contribute to any loss under said insurance. Said policies shall provide for thirty (30) days prior
written notice to the City of cancellation or material change.
F. If required insurance coverage is provided on a "claims made" rather than
"occurrence" form, the Subrecipient shall maintain such insurance coverage for three years after
expiration of the term (and any extensions) of this Agreement. In addition, the "retro" date must
be on or before the date of this Agreement.
G. Insurance sha!I be written with only California admitted companies that
hold a current policy holder's alphabetic and financial size category rating of not less than A VIII
according to the current Best's Key Rating Guide, or a company equal financial stability that is
approved by the City's Risk Manager. In the event coverage is provided by non-admitted
"surplus lines" carriers, they must be included on the most recent California List of Eligible
Surplus Lines Insurers (LESLI list) and otherwise meet rating requirements.
H. This Agreement shall not take effect until certificate(s) or other sufficient
proof that these insurance provisions have been complied with, are filed with and approved by
the CITY'S Risk Manager. If the Subrecipient does not keep all of such insurance policies in full
force and effect at all times during the terms of this Agreement, the CITY may elect to treat the
failure to maintain the requisite insurance as a breach of this Agreement and terminate the
Agreement as provided herein.
I. All deductibles and self-insured retentions 'in excess of $10,000 must be
disclosed to and approved by the City.
18. LEGAL FEES. If any party brings a suit or action against the other party
arising from any breach of any of the covenants or agreements or any inaccuracies in any of the
representations and warranties on the part of the other party arising out of this Agreement, then
in that event, the prevailing party in such action or dispute, whether by final judgment or out-ofcourt
settlement, shall be entitled to have and recover of and from the other party all costs and
expenses of suit, including attorneys' fees.
For purposes of determining who is to be considered the prevailing party, it is
stipulated that attorney's fees incurred in the prosecution or defense of the action or suit shall
not be considered in determining the amount of the judgment or award. Attorney's fees to the
prevailing party if other than the City shall, in addition, be limited to the amount of attorney's
fees incurred by the City in its prosecution or defense of the action, irrespective of the actual
amount of attorney's fees incurred by the prevailing party.
19. NU:DIATION/ARBITRATION. If a dispute arises out of or relates to this
Agreement, or the breach thereof, the parties agree first to try, in good faith, to settle the dispute
by mediation in San Diego, California, in accordance with the Commercial Mediation Rules of
the American Arbitration Association (the "AAA") before resorting to arbitration. The costs of
mediation shall be borne equally by the parties. Any controversy or claim arising out of, or
relating to, this Agreement, or breach thereof, which is not resolved by mediation shall be
settled by arbitration in San Diego, California, in accordance with the Commercial Arbitration
Rules of the AAA then existing. Any award rendered shall be final and conclusive upon the
parties, and a judgment thereon may be entered in any court having jurisdiction over the subject
matter of the controversy. The expenses of the arbitration shall be borne equally by the parties
to the arbitration, provided that each party shall pay for and bear the costs of its own experts,
evidence and attorneys' fees, except that the arbitrator may assess such expenses or any part
thereof against a specified party as part of the arbitration award.
HOME Program Subrecipient Agreement
National City Tenant Based Rental Assistance Program
Page 6 of 13
20. TERMINATION. A. This Agreement may be terminated with or without
cause by the City. Termination without cause shall be effective only upon 60-day's written notice
to the Subrecipient. During said 60-day period the Subrecipient shall perform all services in
accordance with this Agreement.
B. This Agreement may also be terminated immediately by the City for
cause in the event of a material breach of this Agreement, misrepresentation by the
Subrecipient in connection with the formation of this Agreement or the performance of services,
or the failure to perform services as directed by the City.
C. Termination with or without cause shall be effected by delivery of written
Notice of Termination to the Subrecipient as provided for herein.
D. In the event of termination, all finished or unfinished Memoranda Reports,
Maps, Drawings, Plans, Specifications and other documents prepared by the Subrecipient,
whether paper or electronic, shall immediately become the property of and be delivered to the
City, and the Subrecipient shall be entitled to rece ive just and equitable compensation for any
work satisfactorily completed on such documents and other materials up to the effective date of
the Notice of Termination, not to exceed the amounts payable hereunder, and less any
damages caused the City by the Subrecipient's breach, if any. Thereafter, ownership of said
written material shall vest in the City all rights set forth in Section 6.
E. The City further reserves the right to immediately terminate this
Agreement upon: (1) the filing of a petition in bankruptcy affecting the Subrecipient; (2) a
reorganization of the Subrecipient for the benefit of creditors; or (3) a business reorganization,
change in business name or change in business status of the Subrecipient.
F. In the event that HUD withdraws any portion of the City's HOME funds,
the City shall not be obligated to reimburse the Sub-recipient or sub-contractor for any activity
expense incurred or otherwise. City will notify Sub-recipient or subcontractor if such event by
HUD occurs.
21. NOTICES. All notices or other communications required or permitted
hereunder shall be in writing, and shall be personally delivered; or sent by overnight mail
.,(Federal Express or the like); or sent by registered or certified mail, pQs_tage prepaid, return
receipt requested; or sent by ordinary mail, postage prepaid; or telegraphed or cabled; or
delivered or sent by telex, telecopy, facsimile or fax; and shall be deemed received upon the
earlier of {i) if personally delivered, the date of delivery to the address of the person to receive
such notice, (ii) if sent by overnight mail, the business day following its deposit in such overnight
mail facility, (iii) if mailed by registered, certified or ordinary mail, five (5) days (ten (10) days if
the address is outside the State of California) after the date of deposit in a post office, mailbox,
mail chute, or other like facility regularly maintained by the United -States Postal Service, (iv) if
given by telegraph or cable, when delivered to the telegraph company with charges prepaid, or
(v) if given by telex, telecopy, facsimile or fax, when sent. Any notice, request, demand,
direction or other communication delivered or sent as specified above shall be directed to the
following persons:
To the City:
To the Subrecipient:
Angelita Palma, Community Development Specialist II
City of National City, Housing & Economic Development
140 E 12th Street, Suite B
National City, CA 91950
Dina Chavez, Associate Director
South Bay Community Services
430 F Street
Chula Vista, CA 91910
HOME Program Subrecipient Agreement
National City Tenant Based Rental Assistance Program
Page 7 of 13
Notice of change of address shail be given by written notice in the manner
specified in this Section. Rejection or other refusal to accept or the inability to deliver because of
changed address of which no notice was given shall be deemed to constitute receipt of the
notice, demand, request or communication sent. Any notice, request, demand, direction or other
communication sent by cable, telex, telecopy, facsimile or fax must be confirmed within fortyeight
(48) hours by letter mailed or delivered as specified in this Section.
22. CONFLICT OF INTEREST AND POLITICAL REFORM ACT
OBLIGATIONS. During the term of this Agreement, the Subrecipient shall not perform services
of any kind for any person or entity whose interests conflict in any way with those of the City of
National City. The Subrecipient also agrees not to specify any product, treatment, process or
material for the project in which the Subrecipient has a material financial interest, either direct or
indirect, without first notifying the City cf that fact. The Subrecipient shall at all times comply with
the terms of the Political Reform Act and the National City Conflict of Interest Code. The
Subrecipient shall immediately disqualify itself and shall not use its official position to influence
in any way any matter coming before the City in which the Subrecipient has a financial interest
as defined in Government Code Section 871 03. The Subrecipient represents that it has no
knowledge of any financial interests that would require it to disqualify itself from _any matter on
which it might perform services for the City.
􀂉 If checked, the Subrecipient shall comply with all of the reporting requirements
of the Political Reform Act and the National City Conflict of Interest Code. Specifically,
the Subrecipient shall file a Statement of Economic Interests with the City Clerk of the City of
National City in a timely manner on forms which the Subrecipient shall obtain from the City
Clerk.
The Subrecipient shall be strictly liable to the City for all damages, costs or
1;3xpenses the City may suffer by virtue of any violation of this Paragraph 22 by the Subrecipient.
23. HOME PROGRAM SUBRECIPIENT PROVISIONS.
A. Use of HOME Funds. The HOME funds will be used to deliver a Tenant
Based Rental Assistance Program that will assist approximately 1 3 National City homeless
families or domestic violence survivors.
B. Affirmative Marketing Procedures. The Subrecipient shall adopt
affirmative marketing procedures and requirements for all HOME assisted housing in
compliance with 24 CFR § 92.35 1 , as wel! as City's affirmative marketing responsibilities.
Affirmative marketing steps consists, at a minimum, of actions to provide information and
otherwise attract eligible persons from all racial, ethnic, and gender groups in the housing
market area to the available housing assistance program The procedures and requirements
must include methods for informing the public and owners about fair housing laws and policies
so as to ensure that all individuals, without regard to race, color, national origin, religion, or sex
are given an equal opportunity to participate in the program. The Subrecipient shall be solely
responsible for the effective marketing responsibilities necessary to achieve Subrecipient's
production goals set forth in Paragraph 2.
C. Environmental Review. The City has assessed the activities carried out
under this agreement in accordance with the provisions of the National Environmental Policy Act
of 1 969 (NEPA) and the related authorities listed in HUD's implementing regulations at 24 CFR
HOME Program Subrecipient Agreement
National City Tenant Based Rental Assistance Program
Page 8 of 13
parts 50 and 58. The City has determined that the activitfes described in the Scope of Work are
exempt from environmental review as described at 24 CFR part 58.34(a)4.
D. Displacement, Relocation, and Acquisition. The City will not provide
financial assistance to any housing unit that is tenant occupied. To ins ure compliance with 24
CFR § 92.353, the Subrecipient and seller, and buyer will certify that any real property selected
for HOME assistance is either owner-occupied or vacant three months before an offer to
purchase is accepted by the seller.
E. Procurement. Unless specified otherwise within this agreement, the
Subrecipient shall procure all materials, property, or services in accordance with the
requirements of 2 CFR Part 200. The Subrecipient will follow their written policy for
procurement.
F. HOME Program Conflict of Interest. No member, officer or employee of
County oi its designees or agents; no member of the governing body of the locality in which the
Program is situated; and no other public official of such locality or localities, who exercises any
functions or responsibilities with respect to the program funded hereunder during their tenure or
for one year thereafter, shall have any interest, direct or indirect, in any Contract or subcontract,
or the proceeds thereof, for work to be performed hereunder. Subrecipient agrees to
incorporate, or cause to be incorporated , like language prohibiting such interest in all contracts
and subcontracts hereunder. No officer, employee, member or program participant of
Subrecipient its contractors or its subcontractors shall have a financial interest, direct or indirect,
in this Contract or the monies transferred hereunder or be financially interested, directly or
indirectly, in the sale to Subrecipient of any land, materials, supplies or services purchased with
any funds transferred hereunder, except on behalf of Subrecipient, as an officer, employee,
member or program participant. Any willful violation of this paragraph with the knowledge,
expressed or implied, of Subrecipient or its subcontractors shall render this Contract voidable by
County.
G. Lead-Based Paint Hazards. The Subrecipient agrees that any residential
structures with assistance provided under this Agreement shall be subject to HUD Lead-Based
Paint Regulations at 24 CFR Part 92.355. Such regulations pertain to all HOME-assisted
housing and require that all owners, prospective owners, and tenants of properties constructed
prior to 1 978 be properly notified that such properties may include lead-based paint. Such
notification shall point out the hazards of lead-based paint and explain the symptoms,
treatment and precautions that should be taken when dealing with lead-based paint poisoning
and the advisability and availability of blood lead level screening for children under seven. The
notice should also point out that if lead-based paint is found on the property, abatement
measures may be undertaken. The regulations further require that a visual assessment, risk
assessment and potentially paint stabilization be conducted as required by 24 CFR Part 35
Subpart J.
H. Flood Disaster Protection. In accordance with the requirements of the
Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1 973 ( 42 U.S. C. 4001 ), the Subrecipient shall assure that for
activities located in an area identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
as having special flood hazards, flood insurance under the National Flood Insurance Program is
obtained and maintained as a condition of financial assistance for acquisition or construction
purposes (including rehabilitation).
HOME Program Subrecipient Agreement
National City Tenant Based Rental Assistance Program
Page 9 of 13
!. Use and Reversion of Assets. If any assets purchased with HOME funds
are sold, the proceeds will be considered as program income and will be used for eligible
activities.
J. Program Income. Any program income or recaptured funds under this
Contract Agreement obtained by the Subrecipient shall be returned within 5 business days to
the City by the Subrecipient.
K. Program Monitoring. In accordance with 24 CFR § 92.254, the City will
monitor, no less than one ( 1) time per year, client eligibility for each assisted project. Each
review shall also include, but not be limited to on-site inspections to determine compliance with
all applicable property codes and standards.
Subrecipient shall fully cooperate with the City in monitoring the effectiveness and work
performed by the Subrecipient in compliance with the terms of the Agreement. City shall have
access at a reasonable hour to all offices and records (dealing with the use of funds that are the
basis of this Agreement) of Subrecipient, it officers, directors, agents, employees, and
subcontractors for the purposes of such monitoring. City shall give Subrecip[ent reasonable
notice for accessing offices and records.
L. Uniform Administrative Requirements. Subrecipient agrees to comply with
the HOME requirements 24 CFR § 92.505 and the requirements and standards of 2 CFR 200.
M. Retention of Records. Subrecipient agrees to keep or cause to be kept
an accurate record of all actions taken and all funds expended, with source documents, in the
pursuit of the objectives of the performance of this Agreement. Such records shall be kept for a
minimum of five (5) years beyond the close of this Contract. Subrecipient also agrees to obtain
and keep on file . and available for inspection by City the following information on each
household assisted under this Agreement:
A. annual income and size of the household;
B. ethnic group of the client;
C. whether the head of household is male or female;
D. additional statistical information as may be required by HUD regulations and
any amendments thereto;
E. the total assistance amount of HOME dollars invested;
F. the compliance with the affirmative marketing requirements and existence of
acceptable procedures;
G. minority and female-owned business data, and affirmative fair housing
actions;
H. compliance with lead based paint regulations and guidelines;
HOME Program Subrecipient Agreement
National City Tenant Based Rental Assistance Program
Page 10 of 13
I ,
J .
compliance with conflict of interest rules; and
evidence the income targeting requirements are met.
N. Hatch Act. The Subrecipient agrees that no funds provided, nor
personnel employed under this Agreement, shall be in any way or to any extent engaged in the
conduct of political activities in violation of Chapter 15 of Title V of the U .S.C.
0. Conflict of Interest. The Subrecipient agrees to abide by the provisions of
24 CFR 84.42 and 570.611, which include (but are not limited to) the following:
a. The Subrecipient shall maintain a written code or standards of conduct
that shall govern the performance of its officers, employees or agents
engaged in the award and administration of contracts supported by
Federal funds.
b. No employee, officer or agent of the Subrecipient shall participate in the
selection, or in the award, or administration of, a contract' supported by
Federal funds if a conflict of interest, real or apparent, would be involved.
c. No covered persons who exercise or have exercised any functions or
responsibilities with respect to HOME-assisted activities, or who are in a
position to participate in a decision-making process or gain inside
information with regard to such activities, may obtain a financial interest in
any contract, or have a financial interest in any contract, subcontract, or
agreement with respect to the HOME-assisted activity, or with respect to
the proceeds from the HOME-assisted activity, either for themselves or
those with whom they have business or immediate family ties, during their
tenure or for a period of one (1) year thereafter. For purposes of this
paragraph, a "covered person" includes any person who is an employee,
agent, consultant, officer, or elected or appointed official of the Grantee,
the Subrecipient, or any designated public agency.
P. Lobbying. The Subrecipient hereby certifies that
a. No Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid, by or on
behalf of it, to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an
officer or employee of any agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or
employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress in
connection with the awarding of any Federal contract, the making of any
Federal grant, the making of any Federal loan, the entering into of any
cooperative agreement, and the extension, continuation, renewal,
amendment, or modification of any Federal contract, grant, loan, or
cooperative agreement;
b. If any funds other than Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will
be paid to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer
or employee of any agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or
employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress in
connection with this Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative
HOME Program Subrecipient Agreement
National City Tenant Based Rental Assistance Program
Page 1 1 of 13
agreement, it wil! complete and submit Standard Form-LLL, "Disclosure
Form to Report Lobbying," in accordance with its instructions; and
c. It will require that the language of paragraph (d) of this certification be
included in the award documents for all sub awards at all tiers (including
subcontracts, sub grants, and contracts under grants, loans, and
cooperative agreements) and that all Subrecipfents shall certify and
disclose accordingly:
d. This certification is a material representation of fact upon which reliance
was placed when this transaction was made or entered into. Submission
of this certification is a prerequisite for making or entering into this
transaction imposed by section 1352, title 31, U . S.C. Any person who
fails to fi!e the required certification shall be subject to a civil penalty of
not less than $10,000 and not more than $100,000 for each such failure.
Q Conditions for Religious Organizations. If applicable, the Subrecipient
must meet the conditions in 24 GDF Part 92.257 regarding the use of HOME funds
involving a primarily religious entity.
R. Closeout. HOME funds will be closed out in accordance with procedures
established by HUD.
23. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
A Computation of Time Periods. If any date or time period provided for in
this Agreement is or ends on a Saturday, Sunday or federal, state or legal holiday, then such
date shall automatically be extended until 5:00 p.m. Pacific Time of the next day which is not a
Saturday, Sunday or federal, state or legal holiday.
B. Counterparts. This Agreement may be executed in multiple counterparts,
each of which shall be deemed an original, but all of which, together, shall constitute but one
and the same instrument.
C. Captions. Any captions to, or headings of, the sections or subsections of
this Agreement are solely for the convenience of the parties hereto, are not a part of this
Agreement, and shall not be used for the interpretation or determination of the validity of this
Agreement or any provision hereof.
D. No Obligations to Third Parties. Except as otherwise expressly provided
herein, the execution and delivery of this Agreement shall not be deemed to confer any rights
upon, or obligate any of the parties hereto, to any person or entity other than the parties hereto.
E. Exhibits and Schedules. The Exhibits and Schedules attached hereto are
hereby incorporated herein by this reference for all purposes.
F. Amendment to this Agreement. The terms of this Agreement may not be
modified or amended except by an instrument in writing executed by each of the parties hereto.
G. Waiver. The waiver or failure to enforce any provision of this Agreement
shall not operate as a waiver of any future breach of any such provision or any other provision
hereof.
H. Applicable Law. This Agreement shall be governed by and construed in
accordance with the laws of the State of California.
HOME Program Subrecipient Agreement
National City Tenant Based Rental Assistance Program
Page 12 of 13
I . Entire Agreement. This Agreement supersedes any prior agreements,
negotiations and communications, oral or written, and contains the entire agreement between
the parties as to the subject matter hereof. No subsequent agreement, representation, or
promise made by either party hereto, or by or to an employee, officer, agent or representative of
any party hereto shall be of any effect unless it is in writing and executed by the party to be
bound thereby.
J. Successors and Assigns. This Agreement shall be binding upon and
shall inure to the benefit of the successors and assigns of the parties hereto.
K. Construction. The parties acknowledge and agree that (i) each party is of
equal bargaining strength, (ii) each party has actively participated in the drafting, preparation
and negotiation of this Agreement, (iii) each such party has consulted with or has had the
opportunity to consult with its own, independent counsel and such other professional advisors
as such party has deemed appropriate, relative to any and all matters contemplated under this
Agreement, (iv) each party and such party's counsel and advisors have reviewed this
Agreement, (v) each party has agreed to enter into this Agreement following such review and
the rendering of such advice, and (vi) any rule or construction to the effect that ambiguities c1re
to be resolved against the drafting party shall not apply in the interpretation of this Agreement,
or any portions hereof, or any amendments hereto.
24. ATTACHMENTS TO THE SUBRECIPIENT AGREEMENT
Exhibit A Scope of Work
Exhibit B: SBCS Tenant Based Rental Assistance Program Manual for National City
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have executed this
Agreement on the date and year first above written.
CITY OF NATIONAL CITY South Bay Community Services
HOME Program Subrecipient Agreement
National City Tenant Based Rental Assistance Program
Page 13 of 13
EXHIBIT “A”
SCOPE OF WORK
TENANT BASED RENTAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 The City of National City, Department of Housing and Community
Development (“City”) is soliciting proposals from qualified organizations for the
development, implementation and administration of a Tenant-Based Rental
Assistance (“TBRA”) Program for homeless National City families with an
emphasis on domestic violence survivors. The TBRA Program will be funded
with federal HOME Investment Partnerships program funds. This contract
begins on the date that it is executed with all funds being committed within
twenty-four (24) months of the execution date. All assistance is to be in the form
of a grant and should be expended within thirty (30) months of the execution date
of this Contract.
Contract dated: December 5, 2017
Funds fully committed by (24 months): December 5, 2019
Funds expended by (30 months): June 5, 2020
1.2 The goal of the City in soliciting these proposals is to cause a TBRA
Program to be developed, implemented, and administered in accordance with the
requirements of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
(“HUD”) HOME Investment Partnerships (“HOME”) program.
1.3 The geographical area to be served by the TBRA Program is all of
National City and surrounding areas.
1.4 The TBRA Program will be funded by HOME funds and is required to be
operated in compliance with all pertinent federal regulations, including but not
limited to 24 CFR Part 92 and 2 CFR Part 200.
1.5 All services performed under the contract are subject to review and
approval by the City and the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development.
To further the City’s objective of increasing the local supply of decent affordable housing
available to eligible lower income persons, the Contractor agrees to develop, implement
and administer a TBRA program for National City homeless families and domestic
violence survivors which shall be operated under the terms of the HOME Investment
Partnerships Program of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
(“HUD”). The work to be accomplished includes, but is not limited to, the following:
A. CONTRACTOR DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
1. Contractor shall develop, implement, and administer a TBRA program to assist
low-income homeless households with an emphasis domestic violence survivors.
Domestic violence is defined by the U.S. Department of Justice, Office on
Violence Against Women as a “pattern of abusive behavior in any relationship
that is used by one partner to gain or maintain power and control over another
intimate partner.”
EXHIBIT “A”
SCOPE OF WORK
TENANT BASED RENTAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
2. All activity conducted by Contractor shall be in compliance with HOME Final
Rule 24 CFR Part 92, with special attention to §92.209, §92.251(d), and
§92.504(d)(1)(iii); Building HOME – Chapter 7: Tenant-Based Rental Assistance;
and HOME CPD Notice 96-07: Guidance on Tenant-Based Rental Assistance
under the HOME Program.
3. Prior to providing any TBRA assistance to homeless families or domestic
violence survivors, Contractor shall prepare and submit, for City approval, a
TBRA Administrative Plan identifying Contractor’s methodology used to deliver
the services requested.
B. CONTRACTOR’S TBRA PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION
1. Marketing and Outreach Activities
Contractor’s marketing approach must address:
• how availability of the TBRA program will be announced;
• where applications will be taken and/or received;
• when applications will be accepted;
• the method for taking applications; and,
• in order to ensure fair housing objectives, what special outreach activities
will ensure that households “lease likely to apply" will be informed about the
TBRA.
2. Application Process
All applications must be in written form. Applications must contain sufficient
source documentation to determine household income and eligibility. Contractor
must retain records, throughout the term of the contract, on the disposition of all
applications.
3. Local Preferences
• Applicant must be homeless or a recent survivor of domestic violence.
• At time of initial eligibility determination, applicant household income
must not exceed 50 percent of the area median income for the San Diego County,
adjusted for household size.
• To ensure a continuum of care, preference shall be provided to homeless
households and households currently participating or graduating from programs
supporting survivors of domestic violence.
4. Waiting List
Contractor shall establish a waiting list for TBRA participation. Contractor shall
develop and follow a written tenant selection plan to determine placement on the
waiting list. The tenant selection plan must explain how the above local
preferences shall be applied to placement on the waiting list.
EXHIBIT “A”
SCOPE OF WORK
TENANT BASED RENTAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
5. Determine Eligibility
Applicants shall be selected from the waiting list in the order established by the
Contractor’s written tenant selection plan. The tenant selection plan shall be
included in the Contractor’s TBRA Administrative Plan. To determine a
household’s eligibility, Contractor must verify:
• the household eligibility for its local preference status;
• the household size and composition; and,
• the household income and adjustments to income. The household income
must be calculated and verified in accordance with HUD-1780-CPD “Technical
Guide for Determining Income and Allowances for the HOME Program” Third
Edition. Contractor shall use the definition of annual income as defined in 24
CFR Part 5, which was formerly commonly referred to as the Section 8 definition.
Applicants who are determined ineligible shall be notified in writing and shall be
given an opportunity to appeal the decision.
6. Occupancy Standard
The Occupancy Standard shall comply with the current occupancy standard
established by the City of National City Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher
Program. The Occupancy Standard is used to provide consistent criteria for
determining the unit size for which the household is eligible.
7. Issue TBRA Vouchers
The issuance of a HOME TBRA voucher authorizes the household to begin the
search for housing. Units must be located in National City or surrounding areas.
Contractor shall issue approximately 19 vouchers for an initial 6-12 month period.
Vouchers may be renewed for an additional 12 months in accordance with
§92.209(g) and §92.253(a) and contingent upon the availability of funding.
8. Conduct a Briefing
The purpose of the Briefing is to ensure that the household understands its
responsibilities, as well as those of the Contractor and the unit owner, and the
household has sufficient guidance to make an informed choice of housing.
The briefing should cover:
• roles and responsibilities of the tenant, owner and Contractor
• limitations on the rent the owner may charge, including how utility
allowances are used
• unit size for which the household is eligible (occupancy standard)
• subsidy calculations, including how the Contractor and tenant shares will
be calculated
• security deposit policy
• voucher expiration and extension policies
EXHIBIT “A”
SCOPE OF WORK
TENANT BASED RENTAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
• guidance on selecting a unit, including Housing Quality Standards
(“HQS”) requirements and procedures for submitting the Request for Unit
Approval form
• lead-based paint information
• fair housing information
• guidance that the voucher holder is free to choose any eligible unit.
9. Unit Selection and HQS Approval
Once the household has located a unit and the owner has agreed to participate in
the TBRA, the household and owner jointly submit a Request for Unit Approval.
Upon submission of the Request for Unit Approval Contractor shall be required to
conduct a HQS inspection of the unit in accordance with §92.251(d) and
§92.504(d)(1)(iii). All units must pass the HQS inspection for the Contractor to
be reimbursed.
10. Lease Approval
Contractor shall document that the requested rent was determined to be
reasonable when compared to comparable, unassisted units. A Lease Addendum,
covering HOME program requirements must be attached to all leases. Contractor
shall obtain a copy of the lease and Lease Addendum.
11. Term of Lease
The term of the lease between the tenant and owner must be for a 6-12 month
period, unless both parties mutually agree in writing to a reduced term or increase
the term for an additional 12 months. The lease shall begin on the first day of
actual tenant occupancy. The Housing Assistance Payment reimbursement to the
Contractor shall not exceed 12 months from the date of initial occupancy and in
no event exceed the actual period of tenant occupancy, if occupancy is less than
12 months.
12. Calculation of TBRA Housing Assistance Payment (“HAP”)
The current Fair Market Rent, adjusted for occupancy standard, established for
the City of National City shall be used to determine the HAP. The HAP shall be
calculated as the difference between 30 percent of the household’s adjusted
monthly income, less associated utility allowance, and the lower of, the FMR or
actual unit rent. Applicants whose initial Total Tenant Rent calculation is less
than $50.00 per month are not eligible to receive TBRA
Deposit assistance of up to one month’s rent will be offered to all applicants in the
form of a grant. Deposit payments will be paid directly to landlords.
13. Execution of Tenant Lease and HAP Contract
The owner and tenant shall enter into a lease. To cover the special requirements
of the HOME program, the Contractor, shall provide a lease addendum to be used
in conjunction with the owner’s lease.
EXHIBIT “A”
SCOPE OF WORK
TENANT BASED RENTAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
The Contractor and owner shall enter into an agreement in which the owner
agrees to comply with the HOME TBRA rules and the Contractor agrees to pay
the HAP.
C. CONTRACTOR’S ONGOING PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION
1. For each fiscal year, July through June, at least 90 percent of the households
assisted by this TBRA must have household incomes at or below 60 percent of the
area median income, adjusted for household size. This means that although the
TBRA program permits assistance to households with incomes of up to 80
percent, the Contractor shall only be able to serve a limited number of households
whose incomes are between 60 percent and 80 percent of area median income.
Contractor shall obtain City’s prior written approval to continue TBRA to
any household with income between 60 percent and 80 percent of area
median income. Contractor shall maintain ongoing records to verify compliance
with this requirement. Documentation verifying compliance with this requirement
shall be provided to City upon request.
2. Annual Recertification
Contractor shall annually confirm each household’s eligibility for continued
participation in the TBRA program and its share of the rent. In order to assure
that the re-examination process is completed in time to provide a 30 day notice to
both the owner and tenant of changes in the household’s eligibility or share of
rent, Contractor shall initiate the annual re-examination process 90 days in
advance of the household’s one-year TBRA anniversary date. Household income
shall be re-examined using source documentation. If household income exceeds
80 percent of the area median income, the household’s TBRA must be terminated.
Contractor shall also ensure that the unit is the appropriate size for the current
household composition in order to comply with the occupancy standard. If owner
requests a rent increase, Contractor shall determine that the proposed rent is
reasonable and does not exceed Section 8 Payment Standard for the FMR..
3. Annual HQS Inspection
The Contractor must conduct an annual HQS inspection. The City will not
reimburse Contractor for any Housing Assistance Payments until the unit
has passed the annual HQS inspection. Rental assistance payments cannot be
paid retroactively and will only begin from the day the unit pass’ inspection.
4. Public or Private Units
Assisted units may be publicly or privately owned; however, units assisted under
a project-based rental assistance agreement or Public Housing Authority units are
not eligible.
5. Portability
Assistance by this TBRA program is not portable.
EXHIBIT “A”
SCOPE OF WORK
TENANT BASED RENTAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
6. Length of TBRA Assistance
The HOME TBRA rental assistance contracts with individual households may not
exceed two years. Contracts can be renewed, subject to the availability of HOME
funds and prior written approval of the City.
7. Quarterly Payment Authorization Form
Contractor shall submit to the City a quarterly report showing the HAP provided
on the HUD TBRA Set Up Form for the HOME Program, identifying monthly
payments for all authorized households. Households that are subsequently
determined by the Contractor to be ineligible for continued TBRA must be given
a thirty day notice by Contractor of this determination. Those who have served
notice they intend to terminate their TBRA assistance should be noted on the next
quarterly submittal. Contractor must notify City on a quarterly basis in the event
that a tenant moves out of a TBRA assisted unit.
8. Quarterly HAP Reimbursement Request
Contractor shall submit to the City a quarterly HAP reimbursement request. The
quarterly HAP Reimbursement Request must be supported by the quarterly HUD
TBRA Set-up form showing the HAP provided. Upon verification of authorized
HAP payments made by Contractor to owner, City shall reimburse Contractor for
eligible HAP payments in accordance with the terms and conditions of the
Contract and Statement of Work.
9. Issues not covered in this agreement are to be handled in accordance with HOME
Final Rule 24 CFR Part 92, with special attention to §92.209, §92.251(d), and
§92.504(d)(1)(iii); Building HOME – Chapter 7: Tenant-Based Rental Assistance;
HOME CPD Notice 96-07: “Guidance on Tenant-Based Rental Assistance under
the HOME Program” and HUD-1780-CPD “Technical Guide for Determining
Income and Allowances for the HOME Program” Third Edition.
D. Budget
Column A
Budget Item
Column B
HOME Funds
Column C
Other
Sources
Column D
List Name(s)
of Other
Sources
Column E
Total
Budget
Personnel
(List Salaried
Position Job Titles)
0.2 FTE Program
Director
$55,000 Foundations
and
donations
$55,000
0.38 FTE FDA $15,808 $15,808
.05 FTE Contract
Compliance
$2,250 $2,250
EXHIBIT “A”
SCOPE OF WORK
TENANT BASED RENTAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
Fringe Benefits $7,143 $ 15,948 Foundations
and
donations
$23,091
Operating Costs
Supplies
Equipment
Rental
Assistance/Subsidi
es
$141,596 $141,596
Insurance
Printing
Utilities
Other:
Administration
(12.8%)
$21,350 $21,350
Budget Total $188,147 $70,948 $259,095
E. EXPENDITURE REQUIREMENT
1. In order to ensure effective administration and performance of approved HOME
Investment Partnerships Grant Programs and to meet HUD performance standards,
Contractor shall demonstrate reasonable progress towards operation of the Project, by
expending approximately $23,000.00 quarterly. In the event that Contractor does not
demonstrate reasonable progress, as defined above, the City shall notify the Contractor of
the expenditure deficiency. Contractor shall have a total of 30 calendar days from the
date of the City’s written notification to correct the deficiency. If the deficiency is not
corrected within that time, Contractor agrees that the City may reallocate the amount of
the expenditure deficiency and terminate the Contract in accordance with the Contract
provisions.
F. RECORDS AND REPORTS
1. The Contractor shall maintain records and make such reports as required by HUD
to enable the City to analyze Contractor’s activity. All records of the Contractor related
to this Contract or work performed under this Contract shall be open and available for
inspection by HUD and/or City auditors during normal business hours.
2. Contractor shall provide the City with a quarterly report, submitted no later than
fifteen (15) days after the last day of the previous quarter, which includes a cover letter,
narrative of the services provided that demonstrates the towards meeting the timeline
goals, the Tenant Based Rental Assistance Set Up Form HOME Program (Attachment
#2), and an itemized accounting of the expenditures of HOME funds during the previous
quarter. Failure to submit quarterly reports in a timely manner will result in withholding
of HOME funds until the report has been submitted. Report due dates are: January 15,
April 15, July 15 and October 15.
EXHIBIT “A”
SCOPE OF WORK
TENANT BASED RENTAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
ATTACHMENT #1
HOME REQUIREMENTS
WHEREAS, there has been enacted into law the HOME Act, Title II of the
Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (the “Act”), creating the HOME
Investment Partnerships Program (“HOME”) that provides funds to expand the supply of
affordable housing for very low-income and low-income persons; and
WHEREAS, City acting as a HOME “Participating Jurisdiction”
WHEREAS, City received approval from the City Council to allocate HOME
funds for a TBRA program for National City homeless families with an emphasis on
survivors of domestic violence (hereinafter referred to as the “Project’) on May 2, 2017
and June 20, 2017; and
WHEREAS, City incorporated the funding of the Project into the City’s HOME
Investment Partnership Annual Funding Plan which was submitted to HUD; and
WHEREAS, HUD has approved the City’s Annual Funding Plan for HOME
Investment Partnerships funds; and
WHEREAS, it is the desire of the Contractor and the City that the Project be
implemented; and
WHEREAS, the Contractor shall undertake the same obligations to the City with
respect to the Project in the City’s aforesaid Annual Funding Plan for participation in the
HOME Investment Partnerships Program;
NOW THEREFORE, for valuable consideration, the receipt and sufficiency of which is
hereby acknowledged, the parties agree as follows:
l. WORK TO BE PERFORMED: Contractor shall implement the Statement
of Work (Attachment B) and attached hereto fully in accordance with the terms of
the Annual Funding Plan approved by the City and submitted to HUD in
application for funds to carry out the Project and the Certifications which were
submitted concurrently with the Annual Funding Plan. The Annual Funding Plan
and Certifications form is hereby incorporated by reference into this Contract
fully as if set forth herein.
Contractor shall also undertake the same obligations to the City that the City has
undertaken to HUD pursuant to said Annual Funding Plan and Certifications.
Contractor shall hold City harmless against any harm that it may suffer with
respect to HUD on account of any failure on the part of Contractor to comply with
the requirements of any such obligation. The obligations undertaken by
EXHIBIT “A”
SCOPE OF WORK
TENANT BASED RENTAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
Contractor include, but are not limited to, the obligation to comply with the
current and most up-to-date version of each of the following:
(a) Title II of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act, as
amended, 42 U.S.C. 12701;
(b) HUD regulations relating to HOME Investment Partnerships Program (24
CFR 92.1, et seq.);
(c) HUD regulations relating to environmental review procedures for the
HOME Investment Partnerships Program (24 CFR 92.352);
(d) Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 USC § 2000d); Title VII of
the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Public Law 88-352); Title VIII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1968 (Fair Housing Act, 42 USC § 3601, et seq.); Section
109 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974; Executive
Order 11246, as amended (equal employment opportunity); Executive
Order 11063 (non-discrimination), as amended by Executive Order 12259;
and any HUD regulations heretofore issued or to be issued to implement
these authorities relating to civil rights;
(e) All Section 3 covered contracts shall include the following clause (referred
to as the Section 3 clause):
i. The work to be performed under this contract is subject to the
requirements of Section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development
Act of 1968, as amended, 12 U.S.C. 1701u (Section 3). The
purpose of Section 3 is to ensure that employment and other
economic opportunities generated by HUD assistance or HUDassisted
projects covered by Section 3, shall, to the greatest extent
feasible, be directed to low- and very low-income persons,
particularly persons who are recipients of HUD assistance for
housing.
ii. The parties to this contract agree to comply with HUD's
regulations in 24 CFR Part 135, which implement Section 3. As
evidenced by their execution of this contract, the parties to this
contract certify that they are under no contractual or other
impediment that would prevent them from complying with the Part
135 regulations.
iii. Contractor agrees to send to each labor organization or
representative of workers with which Contractor has a collective
bargaining agreement or other understanding, if any, a notice
advising the labor organization or workers' representative of the
EXHIBIT “A”
SCOPE OF WORK
TENANT BASED RENTAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
Contractor’s commitments under this Section 3 clause, and will
post copies of the notice in conspicuous places at the work site
where both employees and applicants for training and employment
positions can see the notice. The notice shall describe the Section 3
preference, shall set forth minimum number and job titles subject
to hire, availability of apprenticeship and training positions, the
qualifications for each; and the name and location of the person(s)
taking applications for each of the positions; and the anticipated
date the work shall begin.
iv. The Contractor agrees to include this Section 3 clause in every
subcontract subject to compliance with regulations in 24 CFR Part
135, and agrees to take appropriate action, as provided in an
applicable provision of the subcontract or in this Section 3 clause,
upon a finding that the subcontractor is in violation of the
regulations in 24 CFR part 135. The Contractor will not
subcontract with any subcontractor where the Contractor has notice
or knowledge that the subcontractor has been found in violation of
the regulations in 24 CFR Part 135.
v. The Contractor will certify that any vacant employment positions,
including training positions, that are filled (1) after the Contractor
is selected but before the contract is executed, and (2) with persons
other than those to whom the regulations of 24 CFR Part 135
require employment opportunities to be directed, were not filled to
circumvent the contractor's obligations under 24 CFR Part 135.
vi. Noncompliance with HUD's regulations in 24 CFR Part 135 may
result in sanctions, termination of this contract for default, and
debarment or suspension from future HUD assisted contracts.
vii. With respect to work performed in connection with Section 3
covered Indian housing assistance, section 7(b) of the Indian Self-
Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 450e) also
applies to the work to be performed under this contract. Section
7(b) requires that to the greatest extent feasible (i) preference and
opportunities for training and employment shall be given to
Indians, and (ii) preference in the award of contracts and
subcontracts shall be given to Indian organizations and Indianowned
Economic Enterprises. Parties to this contract that are
subject to the provisions of Section 3 and section 7(b) agree to
comply with Section 3 to the maximum extent feasible, but not in
derogation of compliance with section 7(b).
EXHIBIT “A”
SCOPE OF WORK
TENANT BASED RENTAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
(f) The Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition
Policies Act of 1970, 42 USC § 4601, et seq., and regulations adopted to
implement that Act in 49 CFR Part 24;
(g) 2 CFR 200 Office of Management and Budget ("OMB") “Cost Principles
for Non-Profit Organizations”; “Audits of States, Local Governments, and
Non-Profit Organizations”; and “Uniform Administrative Requirements
for Grants and Agreements with Institutions of Higher Education,
Hospitals and Other Non-Profit Organizations”. Reference is particularly
made to 24 CFR 85 entitled "Administrative Requirements for Grants and
Cooperative Agreements to State, Local and Federally Recognized Indian
Tribal Governments.”
(h) 24 CFR 92.503 concerning program income, repayments, and recaptured
funds of the HOME Regulations. Any Program Income earned by the
Contractor in carrying out the activities of this Contract shall be returned
to the City. The Contractor shall report all Program Income to the City.
Upon expiration of this Contract, Contractor shall transfer to the City of
National City any HOME funds on hand at the time of expiration and any
accounts receivable attributable to the use of HOME funds;
(i) 24 CFR 92.252 or 92.254, as applicable, concerning HUD affordability
regulations relating to the HOME Investment Partnerships Program.
Repayment of any funds to the City of National City is required if the
housing does not meet the affordability requirements for the specified time
period;
(j) The following laws and regulations relating to preservation of historic
places; National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 (Public Law 89-665);
the Archaeological and Historical Preservation Act of 1974 (Public Law
93-291); and Executive Order 11593;
(k) The Labor Standards Regulations set forth in 24 CFR 92.354;
(l) Prevailing Wages set forth in Labor Code Section 1720.
(m) The Hatch Act relating to the conduct of political activities (5 U.S.C. §§
1502, et. seq.);
(n) The Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973 (42 U.S.C. § 4106 and the
implementing regulations in 44 CFR Parts 59-79);
EXHIBIT “A”
SCOPE OF WORK
TENANT BASED RENTAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
(o) The Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Public Law 93-112) as amended,
including Section 504 which relates to nondiscrimination in federal
programs and HUD Regulations set forth in 24 CFR Part 8;
(p) The Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. § 7401, et seq.) and the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, as amended (33 U.S.C. § 1251, et seq.) and the
regulations adopted pursuant thereto (40 CFR Part 6);
(q) The Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988 (Public Law 100-690);
(r) The Lead-Based paint Poisoning Prevention Act, the Residential Lead-
Base Paint Hazard Reduction Act of 1992, and implementing regulations
at Part 35;
(s) No member, officer or employee of the Contractor, or its designee or
agents, no member of the governing body of the locality in which the
Project is situated, and no other public official of such locality or localities
who exercises any functions or responsibilities with respect to the Project
during his/her tenure or for one year thereafter, shall have any interest,
direct, or indirect, in any contract or subcontract, or the process thereof,
for work to be performed in connection with the Project assisted under the
Grant, and that it shall incorporate, or cause to be incorporated, in all such
contracts or subcontracts a provision prohibiting such interest pursuant to
the purposes of this certification;
(t) The Contractor certifies, that in accordance with Section 319 of Public
Law 101-121, to the best of his or her knowledge and belief that:
i. No federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid, by or
on behalf of the undersigned, to any person for influencing or
attempting to influence an officer or employee of any agency, a
member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, in
connection with the awarding of any federal contract, the making
of any federal grant, the making of any federal loan, the entering
into of any cooperative contract, and the extension, continuation,
renewal, amendment, or modification of any federal contract,
grant, loan, or cooperative contract.
ii. If any funds other than federal appropriated funds have been paid
or will be paid to any person for influencing or attempting to
influence an officer or employee of any agency, a member of
Congress, or an employee of a member of Congress in connection
with this federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative contract, the
undersigned shall complete and submit Standard Form-LLL,
EXHIBIT “A”
SCOPE OF WORK
TENANT BASED RENTAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
“Disclosure Form to Report Lobbying”, in accordance with its
instructions.
(u) The Contractor shall adopt an affirmative marketing plan in accordance
with Section 92.351, if the housing being funded contains five or more
units;
(v) The Architectural Barriers Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. §§ 4151, et seq.); and
(w) The bonding requirements described in 24 CFR Part 85.36 required for
construction or facility improvement contracts or subcontracts that exceed
the simplified acquisition threshold (defined at 41 U.S.C. 403(11)).
Page 1 of 4 Revised (8/06)
Tenant Based Rental Assistance (TBRA) Set Up Form
HOME Program
Check the appropriate box:
Original Submission Change Owner’s Address
Revision
Name and Phone Number of Person Completing Form:
A. General and Activity Information.
Set Up Activity
B. Objective and Outcome.
C. Household Characteristics. (Refer to code below where applicable) Assisting more than 8 tenants? Make copies of this page for
additional space.
Monthly Rent Household Tenant Contract
Last
Name
# of
Bdrms
Sec
Dep
Tenant
Monthly
Rent
TBRA
Monthly
Rent
Total
Monthly
Rent
%
Med
Hispanic?
Y/N
Race Size Type Paid To
O=Owner
T=Tenant
New?
Y/N
Months
(1 to 24)
D. Total/Subtotal of HOME Funds Requested: $
1. Name of Participant: 2. County Code: 3. IDIS Activity ID Number: 4. Activity Name:
1. Objective (enter code): (2)
(1) Create suitable living environment
(2) Provide decent affordable housing
(3) Create economic opportunities
2. Outcome (enter code): (2)
(1) Availability/accessibility
(2) Affordability
(3) Sustainability
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
Office of Community Planning and Development
Exhibit A
Page 2 of 4 Revised (8/06)
E. TBRA Units
Number of TBRA Units:
Designated for the homeless:
Of those the number designated for the chronically homeless:
Was this activity carried out by a faith-based organization (Y/N)?
# of Bdrms
0 – SRO/Efficiency
1 – 1 bedroom
2 – 2 bedrooms
3 – 3 bedrooms
4 – 4 bedrooms
5 – 5 or more bedrooms
Household % of Med
1 – 0 to 30%
2 – 30+ to 50%
3 – 50+ to 60%
4 – 60+ to 80%
Household Race
11 – White
12 – Black/African American
13 – Asian
14 – American Indian/Alaska Native
15 – Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander
16 – American Indian/Alaska Native & White
17 – Asian & White
18 – Black/African American & White
19 – American Indian/Alaska Native & Black/African American
20 – Other multi-racial
Household Size
1 – 1 person
2 – 2 persons
3 – 3 persons
4 – 4 persons
5 – 5 persons
6 – 6 persons
7 – 7 persons
8 – 8 or more persons
Household Type
1 – Single, nonelderly
2 – Elderly
3 – Single parent
4 – Two parents
5 – Other
Exhibit A
Page 3 of 4 Revised (8/06)
Instructions for Completing the Tenant-Based Rental Assistance Set-up Report
HOME Program
Read the instructions for each item carefully before completing the form.
Applicability. The purpose of this report is to assist with the collection
of information to be entered into IDIS. This report is to be completed for
each TBRA activity set-up in IDIS. A single activity may include up to
99 tenants. For centralized State projects, the tenants must be in the
same county.
Timing. Data is to be entered into IDIS before funds may be drawn
down for the activity. An amended set-up report should be completed to
increase or decrease HOME funding for the activity.
A. General and Activity Information.
1. Name of Participant. Enter the name of the participating
jurisdiction or the agency administering the TBRA activity.
2. County Code. Enter the county code of the agency administering
this HOME activity.
3. IDIS Activity ID Number. Enter the activity number assigned by
IDIS.
4. Activity Name. Enter the name designated to the activity. The
blank boxes may be used for internal tracking purposes.
B. Objective and Outcome:
Objective. Enter the code of the objective that best describes the
purpose of the activity. If a code is not entered in IDIS, the system will
default the answer to “2” – Decent affordable housing.
1. Suitable living environments. Applies to activities that benefit
communities, families, or individuals by addressing issues in their
living environment.
2. Decent affordable housing. Applies to housing activities that
meet individual family or community needs. This objective should
not be used for activities where housing is an element of a larger
effort.
3. Creating economic opportunities. Applies to activities
related to economic development, commercial revitalization, and
job creation.
Outcome. Enter code of the outcome that best describes the benefits
resulting from the activity. If a code is not entered in IDIS, the system
will default the answer to “2” – Affordability.
1. Availability/accessibility. Applies to activities that make
services, infrastructure, housing, and shelter available and
accessible. Note that accessibility does not refer only to physical
barriers.
2. Affordability. Applies to activities that provide affordability in a
variety of ways. It can include the creation or maintenance of
affordable housing, basic infrastructure hookups, or services such
as transportation or day care.
3. Sustainability. Applies to activities that promote livable or
viable communities and neighborhoods by providing services or by
removing slums or blighted areas.
C. Household Characteristics.
Complete one line for each tenant receiving tenant-based rental
assistance from the HOME Program.
Tenant’s Last Name. Enter the tenant’s last name if the name is 5
letters or less. Enter the first five letters of the last name if the name is
more than five letters or a unique file identification number.
# of Bdrms. Enter 0 for a single room occupancy (SRO) unit or for an
efficiency unit, 1 for 1 bedroom, 2 for 2 bedrooms, 3 for 3 bedrooms, 4
for 4 bedrooms, and 5 for 5 or more bedrooms.
Sec Dep. Enter the amount of HOME funds to be paid to the tenant or
owner as a security deposit payment (to the nearest dollar).
Tenant Monthly Rent. Enter the actual rent, including utilities, to be
paid by the tenant at the time of activity completion (to the nearest
dollar). If the rent includes utilities, or, if the rent includes partial utilities,
e.g., heat, but not electricity, these utility costs must be added to the
rent. Compute utility costs for the area (and in the case of partial
utilities, compute costs for utilities excluded from the rent), by using the
utility allowance schedule produced by the local Public Housing
Authority (PHA).
TBRA Monthly Rent. Enter the amount of HOME funds to be paid to
the tenant or owner as a rent subsidy payment, including any utility
allowances (to the nearest dollar).
Total Monthly Rent. The total monthly rent is automatically calculated
by IDIS.
Household % of Med. For each household assisted with HOME funds,
enter one code only based on the following definitions:
1. 0 to 30% refers to a household whose annual income is at or
below 30 percent of the median family income for the area, as
determined by HUD with adjustments for smaller and larger
families.
2. 30+ to 50% refers to a household whose annual income exceeds
30 percent and does not exceed 50 percent of the median family
income for the area, as determined by HUD with adjustments for
smaller and larger families.
3. 50+ to 60% refers to a household whose annual income exceeds
50 percent and does not exceed 60 percent of the median family
income for the area, as determined by HUD with adjustments for
smaller and larger families.
4. 60+ to 80% refers to a household whose annual income exceeds
60 percent and does not exceed 80 percent of the median family
income for the area, as determined by HUD with adjustments for
smaller and larger families.
Household Hispanic? Y/N. For each household assisted with HOME
funds, enter the ethnicity of the head of household as either “Y” for
Hispanic or Latino or “N” for not Hispanic nor Latino. Hispanic or Latino
ethnicity is defined as a person of Cuban, Mexican, Puerto Rican,
South/Central American, or other Spanish culture or origin, regardless
of race. The term, “Spanish origin,” can be used in addition to “Hispanic
or Latino.”
Household Race. For each household assisted with HOME funds,
enter one code only based on the following definitions:
11. White. A person having origins in any of the original peoples of
Europe, North Africa or the Middle East.
12. Black/African American. A person having origins in any of the
black racial groups of Africa. Terms such as “Haitian” or “Negro”
can be used in addition to “Black or African American.”
13. Asian. A person having origins in any of the original peoples of
the Far East, Southeast Asia, or the Indian subcontinent including,
for example, Cambodia, China, India, Japan, Korea, Malaysia,
Pakistan, the Philippine Islands, Thailand and Vietnam.
14. American Indian or Alaska Native. A person having origins in
any of the original peoples of North and South America (including
Central America), and who maintains affiliation or community
attachment.
15. Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander. A person having
origins in any of the original people of Hawaii, Guam, Samoa or
other Pacific Islands.
16. American Indian/Alaska Native & White. A person having these
multiple race heritages as defined above.
17. Asian & White. A person having these multiple race heritages as
defined above.
18. Black/African American & White. A person having these
multiple race heritages as defined above.
19. American Indian or Alaska Native & Black or African
American. A person having these multiple race heritages as
defined above.
20. Other multi-racial. For reporting individual responses that are not
included in any of the other categories listed above.
Exhibit A
Page 4 of 4 Revised (8/06)
Household Size. Enter the appropriate number of persons in the
household: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, or 8 (for households of more than 8, enter
8).
Household Type. For each household assisted with HOME funds,
enter one code only based on the following definitions:
1. Single, non-elderly. One-person household in which the person is
not elderly.
2. Elderly. One or two person household with a person at least 62
years of age.
3. Single parent. A single parent household with a dependent child
or children (18 years old or younger).
4. Two parents. A two-parent household with a dependent child or
children (18 years old or younger).
5. Other. Any household not included in the above 4 definitions,
including two or more unrelated individuals.
Tenant Contract Paid To. Enter an O, if the TBRA Monthly Rent will
be paid to the Owner. Enter a T, if it will be paid to the Tenant.
Tenant Contract New? Enter a Y, if the tenant is newly assisted.
Enter an N, if the tenant’s assistance is being renewed.
Tenant Contract Months. Enter the number of months in the contract
with the tenant. Valid entries are 1 to 24.
D. Total/Subtotal of HOME Funds Requested.
Enter the total amount of HOME funds requested for the activity. This
amount includes the TBRA Monthly Rent for each tenant multiplied by
the Tenant Contract Months. It also includes the security deposit
amount for each tenant, if requested.
E. TBRA: Units
Number of TBRA units designated for the homeless. Of the total
number of TBRA units in the activity, enter the number designated for
the homeless. Homeless is defined as (1) an individual or family who
lacks fixed, regular, and adequate nighttime residence; or (2) An
individual or family who has a primary nighttime residence that is: (a) a
supervised publicly or privately operated shelter designed to provide
temporary living accommodations (including welfare hotels, congregate
shelters, and transitional housing for the mentally ill; (b) an institution
that provides a temporary residence for individuals intended to be
institutionalized; or (c) a public or private place not designed for, or
ordinarily used as, a regular sleeping accommodation for human
beings.
Of those, the number designated for the chronically homeless. Of
the number of units designated for the homeless, enter the number
designated for the chronically homeless. A chronically homeless
person is defined as an unaccompanied homeless individual with a
disabling condition who has either: (1) been continuously homeless for
a year or more, or (2) has had at least four episodes of homelessness in
the past three years. A disabling condition is defined as a diagnosable
substance use disorder, serious mental illness, developmental disability,
or chronic physical illness or disability. For the purpose of determining
chronically homelessness, a homeless person an unaccompanied
individual sleeping in a place not meant for human habitation or in an
emergency homeless shelter.
Note: IDIS will default to zero if units are not entered in these fields.
Faith-based Organization. Was this activity carried out by a faithbased
organization (y/N)? Enter “Y” if it is known or if the organization
declares itself to be a faith-based organization. If not, enter “N”.
Note: IDIS will enter the default answer of “N” if an answer is not typed
in the field.
Exhibit A
HUD TBRA Set Up Form
C. Household Characteristics : Refer instructions and codes (below) where applicable.
Notes:
Line
Client ID# Address
# of
Bedrooms
Move-in
Date
Security
Deposit
Gross Rent
Utility
Allowance
Tenant TBRA
Subsidy
Total Rent Income
% Area
Median
Income
Hispanic
Yes/No
Race Size Type
Paid to
O=owner
T=Tenant
Newly
Assisted
Y= Yes/
N=No
Months
1 to 24
Contract
Expiration
Date
The amounts in bold type are the tenant and HAP
amounts that should be constant going forward.
Monthly Rent Household Tenant Contract
Exhibit A