



PROJECT "A WAY BACK HOME" GRANT AGREEMENT 
THIS GRANT AGREEMENT ("Agreement") is made as of this. day of October, 2020, by and between the CITY OF EL CAJON, a public body corporate and politic (the "City") and THE SALVATION ARMY, a California corporation (hereinafter referred to as "Grant Recipient"). The City and the Grant Recipientare collectively referred toasthe "Parties." 

RECITALS 
A. On July 14, 2020, the City Council of the City of El Cajon approved the funding of "'A WAY BACK HOME' REUNIFICATION PROJECT" (the "Grant") in the amount of not to exceed TEN THOUSAND DOLLARS ($10,000.00) (the "Grant Award") toGrant Recipient. 
B. Grant Recipient has proposed a project that reunifies homeless individuals currently residing in El Cajon with families or friends outside of the San Diego County region (the "Project"). The Project works with family members and homeless individuals to determine if reunification would be beneficial. The Project also pays for eligible costs associated with transportation, lodging, food and re­settlement. 
C. The Parties desire to enter into an agreement for implementation of the '"A WAY BACK HOME' REUNIFICATION PROJECT" services, with a Grant Award in the amount of not toexceed TEN THOUSAND DOLLARS ($10,000.00). 
D. The Grant Award shall be in the form of a reimbursement from the City to Grant Recipient, asdefined in this Grant Agreement, with the intent toservea minimum of twenty (20) locally residing homeless individuals. 
AGREEMENT 
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the recitals stated above, the mutual covenants set forth below, the Parties agree, promise and declare as follows: 
ARTICLE I. GRANT PROVISIONS 
Section 1.1 -The Grant Award. The City hereby awards to Grant Recipient, for the purpose of the Project, the Grant Award in the amount of not to exceed TENTHOUSAND DOLLARS ($10,000.00), according to the terms and conditions set forth below: 
Section 1.2 -No Partnership or Joint Venture. The relationship between the City and Grant Recipient created by this Agreement shall not be one of partnership or joint venture. 
Section 1.3 -Indemnification. Grant Recipient agrees and promises to protect, defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the City of El Cajon, and its respective elected and appointed officials, officers, directors, agents, employees and representatives from any and all liabilities, losses, damages, including, but notlimited to, claims for injury or death to any person occurring as a result of the Project, including losses from negative cash 

Project "A Way Back Home" Grant Agreement Salvation Army and City of El Cajon Page 1 of 17 


flows. It is expressly understood that Grant Recipient is solely and exclusively responsible for any and all management of the Project. 
Section 1.4 -Term. This Agreement, and the services to be provided by the Grant Recipient, shall be for a period of one (1) year, beginning October 6, 2020 and ending October 5, 2021 (the "Term" or "Grant Period"). Such term may be extended for two (2) additional one-year periods upon written agreement of both parties to this Agreement. 
Section 1.5 -Termination. This Agreement may be terminated in whole or in part at any time by either party upon giving thirty (30) days written notice to the other party. Unless it is in default of any of the terms, conditions, representations or warranties contained herein, based on any notice of termination provided by City, Grant Recipient shall be entitled to utilize such amounts remaining of the Grant Award for any work performed through the date of termination. 
Section 1 .6 -Conditions to City Obligations and Covenants of Grant Recipient.The obligation of the City to fund the Grant Award is subject to the following conditions and Grant Recipient agrees to perform any and all covenants hereinafter set forth in a timely manner. 
(a) 
The City shall reimburse Grant Recipient for eligible expenditures related to the reunification of a homeless individual. 

(b) 
Upon a written request from Grant Recipient, the City may make cash advances of up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the Grant Amount for working capital to Grant Recipient. Additional advances of no greater than 25% shall be requested in writing as each advance is reduced and will be made based on needs as determined by City's City Manager or such person designated by the City Manager. 

Any outstanding advances will be returned on or before the termination of this Agreement as either a reduction of the final reimbursement request or atransfer of funds from Grant Recipient. Grant Recipient shall indicate in writing, no later than three (3) months prior to the termination of thisAgreement, detailing how the advance shall be returned to the City. 

(c) 
The Grant Recipient certifies and agrees that it will not use funds provided through this Agreement to pay for entertainment, gifts, alcoholic beverages, or unreasonable costs for the purposes set forth in Recital B and pursuant to this Agreement. Grant Recipient further certifies and agrees that it will at no time provide cash directly to homeless individuals that are participants in this Project. 

(d) 
Grant Recipient shall be eligible for reimbursement if the following criteria are met: 



1. The individual reunited with family or friends shall be a documentedhomeless individual that is residing in the City of El Cajon, 

Project "A Way Back Home" Grant Agreement Salvation Army and City of El Cajon Page 2 of 17 


2. 
The homeless individual shall be relocated outside of San DiegoCounty, and 

3. 
Receipts documenting eligible costs are presented in an orderly manner to the City. 


(e) 
The average cost per relocation is estimated to be $500. If a reimbursement request exceeds $600, Grant Recipient shall seek written approval from the City prior to agreeing to reunification expenditures. 

(f) 
Grant Recipient shall provide a quarterly status report as defined in Section 


1.9. Quarterly status reports shall be submitted to the City no later than: 
1. 
October 15th for the period of July, August and September; 

2. 
January 15th for the period of October, November and December; 

3. 
April 15th for the period of January, February and March; and 

4. 
July 15th for the period of April, May and June. 


A final report at the conclusion of the grant period shall also be provided. 
(g) 
Grant Recipient represents, warrants and agrees that: (i) funds reimbursed by the City pursuant to this Agreement are advanced wholly or in part for the benefit of the Grant Recipient, and (ii) Grant Recipient is responsible for all obligations created by this Agreement. 

(h) 
Grant Recipient agrees to and shall use the funds herein solely for and in connection with those purposes set forth in Recital B and pursuant to this Agreement; 



(i) Grant Recipient shall provide the City with insurance as referenced on Exhibit "A" hereto naming the City of El Cajon, and its elected and appointed officials, officers, directors, and employees, as additional insureds, at the sole cost and expense of the Grant Recipient. Said insurance shall remain in full force and effect during the term of this Agreement. 
Section 1.7 -Grant Recipient's Representations and Warranties. Grant Recipient represents, warrants and can demonstrate that: 
(a) 
The Grant Recipient is a validly and lawfully formed nonprofit corporation, is in good standing under California law, whose income is exempt from taxation under section 501 (c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code; 

(b) 
Execution of this Agreement has been duly authorized by the GrantRecipient and shall not result, with the passage of time or the giving of notice, or both, in breach of, or in acceleration of, performance under any contract or document to which the Grant Recipient may be a party; 

(c) 
All approvals have been obtained in connection with the Grant Recipient's execution of this Agreement and related agreements and documents, to the effect that no breach of or acceleration of performance under any other 





agreement or document to which Grant Recipient is a party will result from such execution; and 
(d) Grant Recipient agrees to use said funds solely for and in connection with the purposes referenced in Recital B of this Agreement. 
Section 1.8 -Equal Opportunity. During the term of this Agreement, the Grant Recipient agrees as follows: 
(a) 
The Grant Recipient will not unlawfully discriminate against any employee, person, program participant or applicant for employment because of race, age, sexual orientation, marital status, color, religion, sex, handicap, or national origin. The Grant Recipient will take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are employed, and that employees are treated during employment, without regard to their race, age, sexual orientation, marital status, color, religion, sex, handicap, or national origin, if such discrimination is in violation of federal, state, or city laws, regulations, ordinances, or policies. Such action shall include, but not be limited to the following: employment, upgrading, demotion, or transfer, recruitment or recruitment advertising; lay-off or termination; rates of pay or other forms of compensation; and selection for training, including apprenticeship. The Grant Recipient agrees to post in conspicuous places, available to employees and applicants for employment, notices, which are available from the City, setting forth the provisions of this nondiscrimination clause. 

(b) 
The Grant Recipient will, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees or contractors or subcontractors placed by or on behalf of the Grant Recipient, state that all qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, age, sexual orientation, marital status, color, religion, sex, handicap, or national origin. 

(c) 
The Grant Recipient will cause the foregoing provisions to be inserted in all contracts and subcontracts for any work covered by this Agreement so that such provisions will be binding upon each subcontractor, provided that the foregoing provisions shall not apply to contracts or subcontracts for standard commercial supplies of raw materials. 

(d) 
The Grant Recipient hereby agrees to comply with Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, and the California Fair Employment Practices Act. 


Section 1.9 -Quarterly Status Reports. Grant Recipient shall provide the City with detailed written status reports concerning the status of the Project each quarter as defined in Section 1.6(f). Such reports shall include, but not be limited to, the following: (1) total expenditures of Grant Funds to date, (2) expenditure per individual served, (3) location of reunification, (4) demographic and profile information of each individual served, to include: 
A. Number of individual clients served 
B. Race of each client served 
Project "A Way Back Home" Grant Agreement Salvation Army and City of El Cajon Page 4 of 17 


C. Ethnicity of each client served (whether Hispanic or not -a person may be of any race and also be Hispanic) 
D. Number of disabled clients served 
E. Whether or not the head of the household is female 
F. Number of clients who are low income (according to HUD guidelines) 
G. Whether or not the client is an El Cajon resident 
H. Age of clients served; 
I. Birthplace of clients served; 
J. Client's length of time most recent continuous homelessness; 
K. Client's length of time homeless in El Cajon; 
L. Location of client's last permanent housing; 
M. Location client slept at night in El Cajon; 
N. Income information (amount and sources, if any); 
0. Information on whether client has a history of substance abuse, and if so, the respective substance; 
P. Outreach and incentive methods used; 
Q. The amount of time it takes from project enrollment to the actual move-in date; 
R. Whether or not the clients served are chronically homeless; 
S. Client's housing status three (3) and six (6) months after being reunified; 
T. Source of housing assistance funds used, if any; 
U. Number and disposition of referrals provided; 
V. Information on whether and why the client turned down the assistance, if applicable; 
W. Progress made toward goals as evidenced in Recitals "B" and "C", or an explanation of lack thereof; and 
X. Any other accomplishments or problems/concerns the Agency wishes to report. 
Quarterly Status Reports shall be provided until six (6) months following the reunification and placement of the last homeless individual served. 
Section 1.10 -Insurance. Grant Recipient shall, at Grant Recipient's sole cost and expense, maintain such insurance, as is required by the City, in full force and effect, during the entire term of this Agreement. The insurance shall name the City and the City of El Cajon as additional insureds and shall include, but not be limited to, those coverages referenced in Exhibit "A" to this Agreement and as referenced in Section 1.6(i) of this Agreement, except that, notwithstanding the limits described in Exhibit "A," limits of liability shall be $1,000,000 per individual, and $3,000,000 in the aggregate for each occurrence. 
Section 1.11 -Default by Grant Recipient. In the event of a default by Grant Recipient in the performance of any of the terms, covenants and conditions contained in 
Project "A Way Back Home" Grant Agreement Salvation Army and City of El Cajon Page 5 of 17 


this Agreement, or in the event of the commencement of Bankruptcy proceedings by or against Grant Recipient, all sums not yet disbursed or advanced by the City shallimmediately be suspended and this Agreement shall, at the option of City, terminate. The City shall thereafter be released from any and all obligations to Grant Recipient under the terms of this Agreement. 

Section 1.12 -Indemnification. Grant Recipient agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the City and its elected and appointed officials, officers, directors and employees, from and against any and all claims, damages, losses, liability costs(including costs and fees incurred in defense of such claims), expenses and amounts paid in settlement arising from any injury, claim, or damages arising out of Grant Recipient's work on the Project. 
Section 1.13 -Books and Records. The undersigned Grant Recipient, and any contractor hired by the Grant Recipient, shall maintain complete and accurate books and records showing all of the income and disbursements made in connection with the Project and such books and records shall be available for inspection and copy by the City upon request. Books and records relative to the Project and this Grant Award shall be maintained for five years after final project expenditures are reimbursed. 
Section 1 .14 -City's Reliance on Statements and Disclosure of Grant Recipient. Grant Recipient has made certain statements in order to induce the City to make said Grant Award and enter into this Agreement, and in the event Grant Recipient has made material misrepresentations or omissions it is a breach of this Agreement, and the act of doing so shall not affect any remedies the City may have under this Agreement for such misrepresentation or omission. 
Section 1.15 -City not Liable for Acts or Omissions of Grant Recipient or Others. City shall in no way be liable for any acts or omissions of Grant Recipient, any agent or contractor employed by Grant Recipient, or any person furnishing labor and/or materials used in or related to the Project. 
Section 1.16 -Time of the Essence. Time is of the essence in this Agreement and of each and every provision hereof. The waiver by the City of any breach or breaches hereof shall not be deemed, nor shall the same constitute, a waiver of any subsequent breach or breaches. 
ARTICLE II. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
Section 2.1 -Governmental Requirements Superior. All prov1s1ons of thisAgreement and of all the other documents relating to this Agreement shall be subject and subordinate to any and all federal, state and local statutes, regulations, and ordinances, and shall be subject to modification to comply therewith. 
Section 2.2 -Notice. Any Notice under this Agreement shall be deemed given upon actual personal delivery to the notified Party or upon the expiration of two (2) days from the insertion of the notice, properly addressed and certified mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, in a U. S. Mail depository within California, or upon the expiration of seven (7) days from the insertion of the notice in a U. S. Mail depository outside of California. Notices shall be sent to the addresses for the Parties as set forth below or as changed by either Party from time to time by written notice to the other Party. 

Project "A Way Back Home" Grant Agreement Salvation Army and City of El Cajon Page 6 of 17 



City: Ms. Jamie van Ravesteyn City of El Cajon 200 Civic Center Way El Cajon, CA 92020 
Grant Recipient: The Salvation Army 1011 E. Main Street El Cajon, CA 92020 Attn: Capt. Sean Kelsey 
Section 2.3 -Severability. If any provision of this Agreement is deemed to be invalid or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, that provision shall be severed from the rest of this Agreement, and the remaining provisions shall continue in full force and effect. 
Section 2.4 -Non-Waiver of City's Rights. No right, remedy, or power of the City under this Agreement shall be deemed to have been waived by any act or conduct on the part of the City or by any failure to exercise or delay in exercising such right, remedy or power. Every such right, remedy or power of the City shall continue in full force and effect until specifically waived or released by an instrument in writing executed by the City. Nodelay or omission of the City to exercise any right or power arising upon the occurrence of any default under this Agreement shall impair any such right or power or shall be construed to be a waiver of any such default or an acquiescence therein; and every power and remedy given by this Agreement to the City may be exercised from time to time and as often as may be deemed expedient. 
Section 2.5 -Exhibits Incorporated. All exhibits to which reference is made in this Agreement are deemed incorporated into this Agreement whether or not the exhibits are actually attached to this Agreement. 
Section 2.6 -Construction of Agreement. The provisions contained in this Agreement shall not be construed in favor of or against either Party, but shall be construed as if both Parties contributed equally to its preparation. This Agreement shall be construed in accordance with the laws of the State of California. 
Section 2.7 -Assignment. Grant Recipient shall not assign its rights nor delegate its duties under this Agreement without the prior written consent of the City. Any attempt at assignment or delegation in violation of this Section 2.7 shall be void. The City shall have the full right and authority to assign all or part of its rights and delegate all or part of its duties under this Agreement. 
Section 2.8 -Integration. This Agreement represents the entire agreement between the Parties on the subject matter of this Agreement, and supersedes any other agreements, promises or representations, oral or written, pertaining to such subject matter. 

Project "A Way Back Home" Grant Agreement Salvation Army and City of El Cajon Page 7 of 17 




Section 2.9 -Counterparts. This Agreement may be executed in one or more counterparts, each of which shall be deemed an original, but all of which together shall constitute one and the same instrument. It shall not be necessary in making proof of this Agreement to produce or account for more than one counterpart. 
Section 2.10 -Knowing and Voluntary Agreement. Grant Recipient acknowledges that it has carefully read and fully understands all of the provisions and effects of this Agreement. Grant Recipient further acknowledges that it has been given the opportunity to consult with its own independent legal counsel, at its expense, with respect to matters referenced in this Agreement. Grant Recipient acknowledges that it has fully discussed this Agreement with its attorney or has voluntarily chosen to sign this Agreement without consulting an attorney, fully understanding the consequences of this Agreement. GrantRecipient further acknowledges that it is entering into this Agreement without coercion or duress from City and that neither City nor any of its agents or attorneys has made any representations or promises concerning the terms or effects of this Agreement other than those set forth in this Agreement. 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Parties have executed this Agreement on the date first set forth above. 

CITY: GRANT RECIPIENT: 
CITY OF EL CAJON, THE SALVATION ARMY, a California charter city and a California corporation municipal corporation 

b 
,;z: .d»JL 
By [..,------­
By:.i.0110aOA0....0""134"41i..,,_,_______ _ 
GrahamMitchell Richard Chalk 
City Manager Divisional Finance Director 
APPROVED AS TO FORM: APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
llDocuSlgned by: 
____ _ BY
:_.,,_M.6_...,eo..,,,..;,..0.,..,.1.; ... -------­Morgan L. Foley, Capt. Jay Keebler City Attorney, City of El Cajon Divisional Secretary for Business 
Bye':'"°""'"""'.......of_b_wt :l_..'iiiEE;1',11!1984+4..82!= 
Project "A Way Back Home" Grant Agreement Salvation Army and City of El Cajon Page 8 of 17 





EXHIBIT "A" 

CITY COUNCIL POLICY D-3 
(attached) 

Project "A Way Back Home" Grant Agreement Salvation Army and City of El Cajon Page 9 of 17 




CITY OF EL CAJON CITY COUNCIL POLICY 

I SUBJECT :  Insurance Requirements  POLICY  
D-3  

REFERENCE :  Adopted 7 /26/94 Amended 11 /29/05 Amended 04/14/15  EFFECTIVE 04/14/15  PAGE 1 of 8  

PURPOSE 
To provide a uniform City policy for liability insurance requirements and to establish procedures for its consistent application. 

BACKGROUND 
To help protect the City against liability, all individuals, contractors, agencies and organizations conducting business in association with, on behalf of, or in certain circumstances within the City of El Cajon are required to maintain adequate liability insurance coverage acceptable to the City. 
Because of the differing levels of protection needed for various activities conducted within the City, the City has established policy limits and standards which directly relate to the type of activity being conducted. 

POLICY 

All individuals, contractors, agencies, and organizations conducting business either for the City of El Cajon (or the Successor Agency to the El Cajon Redevelopment Agency) or pursuant to an ordinance, resolution, agreement or policy requiring the maintenance of liability insurance shall provide proof of liability insurance in the following amounts and written on an occurrence basis (claims made coverage will be accepted only after verifying that occurrence coverage is not available): 
1. A combined single limit policy with aggregate limits in the amount of $2 million for all construction projects and for carnivals, subdivisions, and pollution coverage subject to section 5.c. under the heading "INSURANCE STANDARDS," with a maximum deductible or self-insurance retention ("SIR") of $500,000; for policies not having a "combined single limit," minimum limits in amounts as follows: 
Commercial General Liability (CGL): Insurance Services Office Form CG 00 01 covering CGL on an "occurrence" basis, including products and completed operations, property damage, bodily injury and personal & advertising injury with limits no less than $1,000,000 per occurrence. If a general aggregate limit applies, either the general aggregate limit shall apply separately to this project/location or the general aggregate limit shall be twice the required occurrence limit. 
Unless staff determines that circumstances (i.e. high risk project, etc.) require the higher limit, the $2,000,000 limit shall be decreased to $1,000,000 with a maximum deductible or SIR of $150,000, when: 





CITY OF EL CAJON CITY COUNCIL POLICY 

I SUBJECT :  Insurance Requirements  POLICY D-3  
REFERENCE:  Adopted 7 /26/94 Amended 11 /29/05 Amended 04/14/15  EFFECTIVE 04/14/15  PAGE 2 of 8  


a. 
The public improvements portion of a subdivision project is less than $50,000; or 

b. 
A construction project (in accordance with the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction-and the Standard Special Provisions, the "Green Book") is for less than $50,000. 


2. 
Except as otherwise provided in this policy, a combined single limit policy with aggregate limits in the amount of $2 million for all others, including, but not limited to, athletic leagues, recreation groups, towing companies and public service agencies; for policies not having a "combined single limit," minimum limits in amounts as follows: 

Commercial General Liability (CGL): Insurance Services Office Form CG 00 01 covering CGL on an "occurrence" basis, including products and completed operations, property damage, bodily injury and personal & advertising injury with limits no less than $1,000,000 per occurrence. If a general aggregate limit applies, either the general aggregate limit shall apply separately to this project/location or the general aggregate limit shall be twice the required occurrence limit. 

3. 
A combined single limit policy with aggregate limits in the amount of $250,000 for homeowners insurance or $500,000 for commercial general liability insurance for small business owners, in either event only where the insurance is required for work in the public right-of-way. "Small business owners" are defined as commercial businesses, or a professional or administrative office uses, where the owners of the business work on-site as their primary calling or vocation, and having no more than two (2) employees not related by blood or marriage. 

4. 
Selected high-risk activities that would otherwise fall under the criteria for category 2 shall be evaluated by staff on a case-by-case basis to determine whether or not the above limits are sufficient. The imposition of liability limits exceeding $2 million for such high-risk activities is appealable to the City Council. 

5. 
$1,000,000 for taxicab companies. 


$500,000 or actual value, whichever is greater, for "valuable papers" and "in transit" 
insurance where City records or personal property is being transported or stored outside of 
City property. 



CITY OF EL CAJON CITY COUNCIL POLICY 

I ,SUBJECTe:  Insurance Requirements  POLICY  
0-3  

REFERENCEe:  Adopted 7 /26/94 Amended 11 /29/05 Amended 04/14/15  EFFECTIVE 04/14/15  PAGE 3 of 8  

7. 
Exceptions to the above limits may be made for non-profit, charitable, political, community and religious organizations. 

8. 
The policy or policies of insurance may be for all operations or activities of the party purchasing the policy or policies provided, however, that the City or the Successor Agency may require a separate policy exclusively for operations of the purchaser where the City Manager, in his or her sole discretion, determines that a single policy would be inadequate to protect the City or Successor Agency in the event of multiple catastrophes. 

9. 
Workers' compensation insurance shall meet the minimum limits required by law. 


INSURANCE STANDARDS 
1. ADMITTED CARRIER/ BEST'S RATING A, CLASS VII 



a. Insurers must be "admitted" carriers pursuant to the provisions of the California Insurance Code and in accordance with all requirements of the State Insurance Commission and must be listed in the: 
"OFFICIAL PUBLICATION DEPARTMENT OF INSURANCE STATE OF CALIFORNIA 45 Fremont Street San Francisco, California 94105 

INSURANCE ORGANIZATIONS AUTHORIZED BY THE INSURANCE COMMISSION TO TRANSACT BUSINESS OF INSURANCE IN THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA DURING [the most recent year for which the publication is available]." 
or 

"California Department of Insurance Company Profile." 




CITY OF EL CAJON CITY COUNCIL POLICY 
I SUBJECT : Insurance Requirements 

POLICY 
D-3 REFERENCE : Adopted 7 /26/94 

PAGE 
EFFECTIVE 
Amended 11 /29/05 Amended 04/14/15 
4 of 8 
04/14/15 

b. Insurers must have a Best's rating of A, Class VII or higher (this rating includes those insurers with a minimum policyholder's surplus of $50 to $100 million). Exceptions to the Best's rating may be considered when an insurance carrier meets all other standards and can satisfy surplus amounts equivalent to a A, Class VII rating. An exception to the rating requirement may be made for the California State Compensation Insurance Fund if not rated. 
2. NON-ADMITTED CARRIER/ BEST'S RATING A, Class XII 
Exceptions to the "admitted" requirement may be considered when a non-admitted insurance carrier meets all other standards herein and: 
a. is either (i) listed in: 
California Department of Insurance List of Approved Surplus Line Insurers 
LISTING OF FILINGS 
or (ii) is currently a party to co-operation agreements with foreign insurance regulatory authorities acceptable to the City Manager or City Attorney (for example, for insurers located in the United Kingdom, agreements must be with both the Prudential Regulatory Authority ("PRA") and the Financial Conduct Authority ("FCA"), or such successor authority or authorities of PRA and FCA; 

b. 
either the carrier or its parent company has a Best's rating of A, Class VII (this rating include those insurers with a minimum policyholder's surplus of $50 to $100 million ; 

c. 
has ten years or more experience in the business of insurance; and 

d. 
if applicable, the reinsurance carrier has a qualified rating. 


3. GENERAL -INSURANCE CERTIFICATES/ ADDITIONAL INSURED 
All insurers (including those insuring against pollution or discharges of hazardous
materials) must provide certificates of insurance and endorsements evidencing coverage 
prior to the start of any contract. All certificates or endorsements must include: 


CITY OF EL CAJON CITY COUNCIL POLICY 




• 
Name of insurance company issuing each policy. All insurers must provide an original endorsement naming the City of El Cajon (and/or the Successor Agency to the El Cajon Redevelopment Agency), and its (their) elected and appointed officials, officers, employees and volunteers (for purposes of this Policy, individually and collectively, the "City Insureds") as additional insureds. This inclusion as additional insureds shall notbe required of Workers' Compensation or professional liability policies of insurance, and may be waived for "valuable papers" coverage with the approval of the City Attorney. 

• 
All insurers must provide an original endorsement stating that the insurance coverage shall be primary insurance as respects the City of El Cajon (ande/or the Successor Agency to the El Cajon Redevelopment Agency), and its (their) elected and appointed officials, officers, employees and volunteers (for purposes of this Policy, individually and collectively, the "City Insureds. Any insurance or self­insurance maintained by the Entity, its officers, officials, employees, or volunteers shall be excess of the Contractor's insurance and shall not contribute with it. 

• 
Waiver of Subrogation endorsement is required on Workers' CompensationCoverage.

• 
Address of named insured. 

• 
Description of coverage, including any special coverage required by the contract. 

• 
Policy numbers. 

• 
Policy periods (If claims made basis, must include retroactive date and length of time allowed as extended reporting period). 

• 
Coverage type (occurrence form vs. claims made). 

• 
Authorized signature and date of issuance. An original signature is required: a digital signature is acceptable so long as it complies with the requirements of Government Code §16.5. 

• 
Unless approved by the City Manager or designee, no certificate shall be accepted that qualifies the obligation of the carrier to provide 30 days written notice of cancellation of the policy. With the approval of the City Attorney the obligation to provide notice of cancellation may be reduced to ten (10) days, but only for termination due to the non-payment of any premium. 







CITY OF EL CAJON CITY COUNCIL POLICY 



4. PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS 
In addition to the standards set forth above, insurance policies for public works projects must also meet the following insurance requirements set out in the most recent edition of the Green Book adopted by the City Council: 
a. 
All insurance certificates shall bear an endorsement or shall have attached a rider whereby it is provided that, in the event of expiration or proposed cancellation of such policy for any reason whatsoever, the City shall be notified by certified mail, return receipt requested, giving a sufficient time before the date thereof to comply with any applicable law or statute, but in no event less than thirty (30) days before expiration or cancellation is effective, the provisions of section 3 herein notwithstanding; and 

b. 
Compliance with Labor Code §§3700 and 3800 relating to Worker's Compensation. 

c. 
Requirements of the Green Book shall prevail. 


5. PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY 
An applicant for permit(s) to do work within the public right-of-way may establishsatisfactory proof of liability insurance in the following manner: 
a. CONTRACTORS 
Contractors must furnish the City with a certificate of liability insurance, which meets the requirements set forth above and any other City requirements contained in this policy. 
b. HOMEOWNERSe/ PROPERTY OWNERS 
Homeowners/Property owners requesting a permit to do work within City rights-of­way or easements immediately adjacent to their respective owned or occupied property, solely for the owner's personal benefit, shall be required to furnish the City with a copy of their homeowner's/property owner's liability insurance policy, which meets the requirements set forth above, with the minimum limits described in category 3 under the heading "POLICY," above. The policy must be effective during the entire period of the proposed work, plus two (2) calendar years, and must provide coverage for claims arising from the work performed, or improvements 




CITY OF EL CAJON CITY COUNCIL POLICY 

I SUBJECTe:  Insurance Requirements  POLICY  
D-3  

REFERENCEe:  Adopted 7 /26/94 Amended 11 /29/05 Amended 04/14/15  EFFECTIVE 04/14/15  PAGE 7 of 8  


owned, by the homeowner in the right-of-way or easement. If the encroachment is ongoing, annual proof of insurance shall be required. The requirement to name the City as an additional insured, and the requirement for a policy for two (2) additional calendar years, may each be waived by the City Council or the City Manager (or her designee) in cases of extreme hardship, in their discretion. 
c. POLLUTION EXCLUSION 
Applications for the installation of monitoring wells for the evaluation of groundwater pollution or for the discharge of formerly polluted groundwater into the City sewer system must be accompanied by a certificate of liability insurance provided by the property owner. Such liability insurance may not contain a pollution exclusion clause and must explicitly indemnify the City against all hazards which may result from either of these activities, including a worsening of pollution, either within the subsurface adjacent to the original pollution or within the City sewer system. 
If the property owner is unable to provide insurance which addresses both general liability and pollution liability, the environmental company or other appropriately qualified entity contracting with the property owner for either monitoring well installation or groundwater pollution remediation, may furnish pollution liability insurance on behalf of the property owner. 
Any insurance approved under this subsection c. shall be an occurrence policy, and shall otherwise comply with the provisions of this Policy. 
d. PUBLIC UTILITIES 
This policy as it relates to work in the public rights-of-way shall not be applicable to Cable TV, Helix Water District, Padre Dam Municipal Water District, SBC, San Diego Gas & Electric, or any other public utility. 
e. TRANSPORTATION/ OVERSIZE LOADSe-PERMITS-See Chapter 10.24 of the El Cajon Municipal Code. 


CITY OF EL CAJON CITY COUNCIL POLICY 
I SUBJECTe: Insurance Requirements 

POLICY 
REFERENCEe: Adopted 7 /26/94 

PAGE 
EFFECTIVE 
Amended 11 /29/05 Amended 04/1e4/1e5 
8 of 8 04/1e4/1e5 
TIME LIMITS/ CANCELLATION PROVISIONS 
All liability insurance required pursuant to this policy shall provide coverage for a sufficient time period to protect the City from liability. The insurer is required to provide a minimum of thirty (30) days-notice of cancellation of any policy. With the approval of the City Attorney (except as provided in section 4, herein) this obligation may be reduced to not less than ten (10) days written notice, but only for termination due to the non-payment of any premium. In no event shall a policy be accepted which terminates prior to the completion of the activity to be covered. 
In certain circumstances, it may be impracticable to obtain continuing insurance coverage due to the duration of the activity or the cost of premature renewal. Under such circumstances, an exception to the coverage period may be made so long as the policy is renewed or replaced with an acceptable insurance carrier and there is no lapse in coverage. Maintenance of proper insurance coverage is a material term of any contract with the City and failure to maintain or renew coverage or to provide evidence of renewal may be treated as a material breach of contract. 
ALTERNATIVE RISK MANAGEMENT PRACTICES; SELF-INSURANCE; RISK-POOLING 
Alternative risk management practices, such as self-insurance, risk pooling, risk retention groups, and other such programs, will be accepted in lieu of commercial insurance policies provided that the coverage meets the requirements of this Policy. Any such alternative risk management practices must meet the financial strength and surplus requirements reflected by the Best's Ratings required of commercial insurance under this Policy. 




