AGREEMENT FOR NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION SERVICES URBAN CORPS OF SAN DIEGO COUNTY THIS AGREEMENT is made and entered into as of the ( ' l , -\ : :Vy day of ~ UV\Sk , 20.ti_ , by and between the CITY OF CARLSBAD , a municipal corporation , ( `` City '' ) , and URBAN CORPS OF SAN DIEGO COUNTY , a certified conservation corps and non-profit , charitable organization , ( `` Contractor '' ) . RECITALS A . City requires on-call , as needed , professional services for neighborhood revitalization and clean-up that is experienced in and skilled in providing a fee for service , laborready workforce prepared to take on a variety of neighborhood revitalization projects and code enforcement clean-up projects , including design services for building and landscaping improvements on both public and private property . B . Contractor has the necessary experience in providing professional services and advice related to neighborhood revitalization tasks , programs and projects as noted above and , as San Diego County 's Conservation Corps , specializes in partnerships with cities and other governmental agencies to put youth to work on crews where they can be part of a team and gain on-the-job skills as well as provide community service . C. Contractor is a licensed general contractor ( # 972059 ) has affirmed its willingness to partner with the city on implementation of a neighborhood revitalization program and its ability to perform such work , is also labor exempt from State Prevailing Wage ( California Labor Code 1720.4 ) and is qualified to provide design services as well as assistance with permitting . NOW , THEREFORE , in consideration of these recitals and the mutual covenants contained herein , City and Contractor agree as follows : 1 . SCOPE OF WORK City retains Contractor to perform , and Contractor agrees to render , those services ( the `` Services '' ) that are defined in attached Exhibit `` A '' , which is incorporated by this reference in accordance with this Agreement 's terms and conditions . 2 . STANDARD OF PERFORMANCE While performing the Services , Contractor will exercise the reasonable professional care and skill customarily exercised by reputable members of Contractor 's profession practicing in the Metropolitan Southern California Area , and will use reasonable diligence and best judgment while exercising its professional skill and expertise . 3 . TERM The term of this Agreement will be effective for a period of two ( 2 ) years from the date first above written . 4 . TIME IS OF THE ESSENCE Time is of the essence for each and every provision of this Agreement . 5 . COMPENSATION The total fee payable for the Services to be performed during the initial Agreement term will be thirty-five thousand dollars ( $ 35,000 ) . No other compensation for the Services will be allowed except for items covered by subsequent amendments to this Agreement . If the City elects to extend the Agreement , the amount shall not exceed thirty-five thousand dollars ( $ 35,000 ) per City Attorney Approved Version 6/12/18 Agreement year . The City reserves the right to withhold a ten percent ( 10 % ) retention until City has accepted the work and/or Services specified in Exhibit `` A '' . Incremental payments , if applicable , should be made as outlined in attached Exhibit `` A '' . 6 . STATUS OF CONTRACTOR Contractor will perform the Services in Contractor 's own way as an independent contractor and in pursuit of Contractor 's independent calling , and not as an employee of City . Contractor will be under control of City only as to the result to be accomplished , but will consult with City as necessary . The persons used by Contractor to provide services under this Agreement will not be considered employees of City for any purposes . The payment made to Contractor pursuant to the Agreement will be the full and complete compensation to which Contractor is entitled . City will not make any federal or state tax withholdings on behalf of Contractor or its agents , employees or subcontractors . City will not be required to pay any workers ' compensation insurance or unemployment contributions on behalf of Contractor or its employees or subcontractors . Contractor agrees to indemnify City within thirty ( 30 ) days for any tax , retirement contribution , social security , overtime payment , unemployment payment or workers ' compensation payment which City may be required to make on behalf of Contractor or any agent , employee , or subcontractor of Contractor for work done under this Agreement . At the City 's election , City may deduct the indemnification amount from any balance owing to Contractor . 7 . SUBCONTRACTING Contractor will not subcontract any portion of the Services without prior written approval of City . If Contractor subcontracts any of the Services , Contractor will be fully responsible to City for the acts and omissions of Contractor 's subcontractor and of the persons either directly or indirectly employed by the subcontractor , as Contractor is for the acts and omissions of persons directly employed by Contractor . Nothing contained in this Agreement will create any contractual relationship between any subcontractor of Contractor and City . Contractor will be responsible for payment of subcontractors . Contractor will bind every subcontractor and every subcontractor of a subcontractor by the terms of this Agreement applicable to Contractor 's work unless specifically noted to the contrary in the subcontract and approved in writing by City . 8 . OTHER CONTRACTORS The City reserves the right to employ other Contractors in connection with the Services . 9 . INDEMNIFICATION Contractor agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the City and its officers , officials , employees and volunteers from and against all claims , damages , losses and expenses including attorneys fees arising out of the performance of the work described herein caused by any negligence , recklessness , or willful misconduct of the Contractor , any subcontractor , anyone directly or indirectly employed by any of them or anyone for whose acts any of them may be liable . The parties expressly agree that any payment , attorney 's fee , costs or expense City incurs or makes to or on behalf of an injured employee under the City 's self-administered workers ' compensation is included as a loss , expense or cost for the purposes of this section , and that this section will survive the expiration or early termination of this Agreement . 10 . INSURANCE Contractor will obtain and maintain for the duration of the Agreement and any and all amendments , insurance against claims for injuries to persons or damage to property which may City Attorney Approved Version 6/12/18 arise out of or in connection with performance of the services by Contractor or Contractor 's agents , representatives , employees or subcontractors . The insurance will be obtained from an insurance carrier admitted and authorized to do business in the State of California . The insurance carrier is required to have a current Best 's Key Rating of not less than `` A- : VII '' ; OR with a surplus line insurer on the State of California 's List of Approved Surplus Line Insurers ( LASLI ) with a rating in the latest Best 's Key Rating Guide of at least `` A : X '' ; OR an alien non-admitted insurer listed by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners ( NAIC ) latest quarterly listings report . 10.1 Coverage and Limits . Contractor will maintain the types of coverage and minimum limits indicated below , unless the Risk Manager or City Manager approves a lower amount . These minimum amounts of coverage will not constitute any limitations or cap on Contractor 's indemnification obligations under this Agreement . City , its officers , agents and employees make no representation that the limits of the insurance specified to be carried by Contractor pursuant to this Agreement are adequate to protect Contractor . If Contractor believes that any required insurance coverage is inadequate , Contractor will obtain such additional insurance coverage , as Contractor deems adequate , at Contractor 's sole expense . The full limits available to the named insured shall also be available and applicable to the City as an additional insured . 10.1.1 Commercial General Liability ( CGL ) Insurance . Insurance written on an `` occurrence '' basis , including personal & advertising injury , with limits no less than $ 2,000,000 per occurrence . If a general aggregate limit applies , either the general aggregate limit shall apply separately to this projecUlocation or the general aggregate limit shall be twice the required occurrence limit . 10.1.2 Automobile Liability . ( if the use of an automobile is involved for Contractor 's work for City ) . $ 2,000,000 combined single-limit

###

