AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE CITY OF CARLSBAD AND WOMEN 'S RESOURCE CENTER : FOR FEDERAL COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT `` FUNDS THIS AGREEMENT ( `` Agreement '' ) made and entered into as of this /. ) / ! ; { 1 - . ( ) [ ) day of .DI.LCJ. , 20-15I . by and between the CITY OF CARLSBAD ( `` City '' ) and WOMEN'SR URCE CENTER , a non-profit corporation ( `` Subrecipient '' ) . RECITALS WHEREAS , the City has applied for and received funds from the United States Government under Title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 , Public Law 93-383 as amended to fund eligible activities which benefit persons of low and moderate income under Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance number 14.218 ; and , WHEREAS , the City wishes to provide assistance to non-profit public service providers who offer services for lower income Carlsbad residents ; and , WHEREAS , the Subrecipient can provide these basic services for lower mcome households with some assistance from the City ; and , WHEREAS , the City has determined that the services offered by Women 's Resource Center are exempt from environmental review under 24 CFR Section 58.34 ( a ) ( 4 ) ; and , WHEREAS , the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development has approved the City 's Annual Consolidated Plan for Community Development Block Grant funds ( hereinafter referred to as the `` Annual Consolidated Plan '' ) . NOW , THEREFORE , in consideration of these recitals and the mutual covenants contained herein , City and Subrecipient agree as follows : 1 . STATEMENT OF WORK The City has allocated federal community development block grant ( `` CDBG '' ) funds , in the amount of fourteen thousand eight hundred ninety six dollars ( $ 14,896 ) to the Subrecipient for provision of services through their offices located at 1963 Apple Street Oceanside , CA 92054 for the period beginning July I , 2017 and ending June 30 , 2018 . The Subrecipient agrees to use all federal funds provided by the City to the Subrecipient pursuant to the provisions of this Agreement , the Scope of Work , attached hereto as Exhibit `` A '' , and in accordance with the tem1s of the Annual Consolidated Plan . Every effort shall be made by the Subrccipient to expend the allocated funds in their entirety by June 20 , 2018 . If the Subrccipient will be unable to expend all of the funds allocated to the project by the noted date , the Subrecipient shall request an extension from the City for continued use of the funds on the approved project based on progress made by the Subrccipient towards CA 05/25/2016 completing the subject project . The City may agree to grant the extension or notify the Subrecipient that , in its sole discretion , the funds must be reallocated to another eligible activity due to slow project progress . 2 . DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS The City shall reimburse the Subrecipient with CDBG funds for necessary and reasonable costs related to the provision of services for eligible residents of Carlsbad for the term of this Agreement . The reimbursements for costs shall not exceed a total of $ 14,896 . However , no more than 90 percent of the total agreed upon compensation will be paid during the performance of this Agreement . The balance due ( remaining 10 percent ) shall be paid upon final certification by the City that Subrecipient has administered the services and activities in compliance with all applicable Federal , state , and local rules and regulations governing these funds , and in a manner satisfactory to the City . Payment for eligible expenses shall be made in accordance with budget information provided in Exhibit `` B '' and in accordance with performance . Subrecipient represents that the budget includes only allowable costs and an accurate analysis of costs applicable to the CDBG funds pursuant to 24 CFR Section 570.502 . Subrecipient shall submit a `` Request for Reimbursement '' to the City for compensation of eligible and actual expenses incurred . The City shall not provide any payments/reimbursements in advance of actual expenditures by the Subrecipient . Subrecipient may request reimbursements anytime after this Agreement is approved by the City Council and continue until the expiration date , or amended expiration date , of this Agreement . Each request for reimbursement shall include documentation to verify expenditure of funds are consistent with this Agreement , the Statement of Work , the Annual Consolidated Plan , and with all applicable Federal , state , and local rules and regulations governing these funds . Payroll records , receipts , paid invoices including an itemized statement of all costs are samples of appropriate methods of reimbursement documentation . 3 . PROGRAM INCOME The Subrecipient shall report , to the City , any interest , or other income , earned as a direct result of the use of federal CDBG funds for the program outlined within this Agreement . All reported program income may be retained by the Subrecipient for costs related to the subject program activities . However , the program income , retained by the Subrecipient , must be expended before additional funds are requested from the City . The requirements are set forth in 24 CPR Section 570.504 which is incorporated herein by reference . 4 . LABOR , MATERIALS AND SUPPLIES : The Subrecipient shall furnish a11 labor , materials and services and bear all expenses necessary to provide the subject program as outlined in this agreement . Under this Agreement , the City 's only CA 05/25/20 l 6 financial obligation to the Subrecipient is to provide the CDBG funds of $ 14,896 maximum as allocated by the City Council for program year 2017-2018 . 5 . RECORDS AND REPORTS The Subrecipient shall maintain all records required by the Federal regulations specified in 24 CFR Section 570.506 that are pertinent to the activities to be funded under this Agreement . Such records shall include but not be limited to : a . Records providing a full description of each activity undertaken ; b . Records demonstrating each activity undertaken meets one of the National Objectives of the CDBG program ; c. Records required to determine the eligibility of activities ; d. Records demonstrating compliance with 24 CFR Section 570.505 regarding change of use of real property acquired or improved with CDBG assistance ; e. Records demonstrating compliance with the requirements in 24 CFR Section 570.606 regarding acquisition , displacement , relocation , and replacement housing ; f. Records documenting compliance with the fair housing and equal opportunity components of the CDBG program ; g. Documentation of all CDBG funds received from the City , eligible expenses incurred for administration of each activity , and other financial records as required by 24 CFR Section 570.502 , and 0MB ( the United States Office of Management and Budget ) Circular A-110 ; and , h. Any other related records as the City shall require to demonstrate compliance with applicable Federal , state , and local rules and regulations governing these funds . The Subrecipient shall submit quarterly `` Progress Reports '' within ten ( 10 ) calendar days of the end of each quarter for the full term of this Agreement . The final progress report is due no later than June 20 , 2018 . The report must include sufficient information to assist the City in monitoring the Subrecipient 's performance . The Subrecipient must demonstrate satisfactory performance prior to reimbursement for expenditures . At a minimum , the performance reports shall include the following information : a . Total number of persons/households participating in the program during reported period ; b . Total number of participants from Carlsbad ; c. Number of low/moderate income Carlsbad persons/households participating in the program during the reporting period ; d. Age and ethnic background of Carlsbad participants ; and , e. Summary of prograrn ( s ) provided to Carlsbad participants . f. Quarterly reports must be submitted by the following : October 10 , January 10 , April I 0 , and June 20 . The Subrecipient shall maintain client data demonstrating client eligibility for services provided . CA 05/25/2016 Such data shall include at the minimum client name , address , ethnicity , income level or other basis for determining eligibility , and a description of the service provided . This data shall assist the Subrecipient in completing the required quarterly progress reports to be submitted to the City . The Subrecipient shall maintain separate accounting records for the federal CDBG funds provided by the City . The City , Federal Grantor Agency , Comptroller General of the United States , or any of their duly-authorized representatives shall have access to all books , documents , papers and records maintained

###

