MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN THE CITY OF SAN MARCOS AND THE ALLIANCE FOR REGIONAL SOLUTIONS THIS MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING , hereafter referred to as MOU , is made and entered into as of QIf 2017 , by and between the City of San Marcos , hereinafter referred to as CITY , and the ALLIANCE FOR REGIONAL SOLUTIONS , hereinafter referred to as ARS . The parties are referenced to individually as PARTY and collectively as PARTIES , with regard to the following : RECITALS Whereas , on June 13 , 2017 , the San Marcos City Council approved the City ' s Fiscal Year 2017- 18 budget which included $ 66,300 for regional homeless shelter support , and ; Whereas , the City of San Marcos has funded the North County Winter Shelter Program with an average of $ 47 , 000 per year since Fiscal Year 2000- 01 , and ; Whereas , the Alliance for Regional Solutions has provided shelter systems addressing the urgent needs of homeless individuals and families in North San Diego County for 10 years , and ; Whereas , the Alliance for Regional Solutions is a comprised of over 50 non- profit member agencies that operate in North County , and ; Whereas , the Alliance for Regional Solutions collects client shelter stay data during its program year and produces an annual report titled , `` Shelter Provided to the Homeless in North San Diego County `` , and ; Whereas , this report includes valuable data including the number of clients sheltered , client demographic characteristics , the reason for homelessness , the length of shelter provided , client ' s housing plans upon exiting the shelter program and a brief review of clients served over a two-year period , and ; . Whereas , attached to this MOU is the Regional Bridge Housing System Funding Request , attached as Exhibit A ; and Whereas , this MOU establishes guidelines to ensure ARS utilizes City funding in support of the regional shelter system that serves the homeless population in North San Diego County . NOW , THEREFORE , in consideration of the mutual covenants contained herein and of the Recitals , it is mutually agreed by and between the PARTIES as follows : 1 . Parties Responsibilities . 1 . 1 ARS agrees to : 1 . 1 . 1 Utilize the City ' s funding to support three year- round shelters operating 365 days a year in Carlsbad , Escondido and Vista . 1 . 1 . 2 Utilize the City ' s funding to support three winter shelters serving Oceanside , North County Coastal and North County Inland communities . 1 . 1 . 3 Continue to produce the annual report on the North County shelter system . 1 . 2 CITY agrees to the following ; 1 . 2 . 1 Contribute $ 66 , 300 in Fiscal Year 2017- 17 . 1 . 2 . 2 Future funding for the regional North County Shelter Program support is contingent upon the City ' s annual approved budget . 2 . Term . The term of this MOU shall be effective from Ni2 `` d , 2017 through June 30 , 2020 , with an option for the PARTIES to automatically renew this MOU for two additional ( 3 ) year terms , unless sooner terminated as provided in Section 3 of this MOU , below . 3 . Termination . Should either PARTY wish to terminate this MOU , the PARTY desiring to terminate this MOU shall provide written notice of such termination to the other PARTY at least fifteen ( 15 ) days in advance of the termination date . Upon the expiration of the fifteen ( 15 ) - day notice period , each PARTY ' s rights and obligations to the other PARTY as set forth shall cease and be of no further force or effect . 4 . Indemnification . CITY , and its elected appointed boards , directors , agents , officers , employees , contractors and representatives ( collectively , `` City Indemnified Parties `` ) shall not be held liable for any actions , claims , liabilities , penalties , fines , costs , judgments or damages to any goods , properties , or effects or any injuries to or death of any person , whether caused by or resulting from any acts or omissions of ARS , or ARS ' s agents , employees , representatives or volunteers . ARS agrees to hold harmless , defend , and indemnify CITY against all actions , claims or demands for injury , death , loss or damages , by anyone whomsoever where such injury , death , loss , or damage was due to the active or passive negligence of CITY . However , ARS will not indemnify CITY for its sole negligence or willful misconduct arising out of this MOU . 5 . Notice . Any and all notices , demands , requests , consents or other communications that are required or permitted to be made hereunder shall be in writing and shall be sent by personal delivery ; first- class mail , return receipt requested ; overnight or express mail service ; or facsimile . Notices will be deemed to have been received : upon delivery if personally delivered ; seventy- two ( 72 ) hours after deposit in the U. S. Mail ; on the day of transmission via facsimile unless sent after business hours and in that event , on the next business day . Notices may be sent to the following addresses ; the PARTIES may deliver notice of change of address or delivery information in the manner outlined in this Section . Alliance for Regional Solutions Attention : Greg Anglea , President , Alliance Executive Committee Address : 550 W. Washington Street , Escondido , CA 92025 Ph : ( 760 ) 294- 6356 City of San Marcos Attention : Julie Magee , Program Manager 1 Civic Center Drive , San Marcos , CA 92069- 2918 Ph : 760- 744- 1050 , ext 3137 6 . No Partnership . Nothing contained in this MOU shall be deemed or construed to create a partnership , joint venture or any other similar relationship between the PARTIES hereto or cause either PARTY to be responsible in any way for the debts or obligations of the other PARTY . Except as either PARTY may specify in writing , the other PARTY has no authority , expressed or implied , to act on behalf of that PARTY in any capacity whatsoever as an agent , or to bind that PARTY to any obligation whatsoever . 7 . Assumption of Risk , Compliance with Laws . ARS agrees to observe and comply with all local , state and federal laws , rules , ordinances and regulations in the performance of its obligations under this MOU . 8 . Required Permits . If applicable , ARS warrants and represents to CITY that it has all permits , licenses , qualifications and approvals of whatever nature which are legally required to practice its profession , and that it will , at its sole cost and expense , keep in effect at all times during the term of the MOU any such permit , license , qualification or approval . 9 . Recitals . All Recitals contained herein are incorporated by reference . 10 . Definitions . The terms `` shall `` , `` must `` and `` will `` used throughout this MOU are intended to be mandatory . 11 . Entire MOU , Amendments . This document contains the entire understanding between the PARTIES with respect to the subject matter hereof , and supersedes any and all prior or contemporaneous negotiations , representations , agreements and/ or understandings in connection with the subject matter . No amendment or modification of this MOU shall be binding unless executed in writing by the PARTIES hereto . 12 . Counterparts . This MOU may be executed in any number of counterparts , each of which for all purposes shall be deemed an original , and all of which , taken together , shall constitute one and the same MOU . 13 . Severability . The provisions of this MOU are severable . In the event that any provision of this MOU , or any element thereof , is found to be invalid , illegal , void , voidable or unenforceable for any reason whatsoever by a court of competent jurisdiction , the PARTIES hereto intend for such invalid portion or clause to be severable from the MOU to the extent permitted by applicable law . Any such provision or portion and its severance shall not affect the validity or enforceability of the remaining provisions of this MOU , which shall remain in full force and effect . 14 . No Assignment . ARS may not assign or subcontract

###

