AGREEMENT AN AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE CITY OF SANTEE , CALIFORNIA , AND CRISIS HOUSE FOR USE OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT FUNDS FISCAL YEAR 2017-2018 THIS AGREEMENT is made by and between the City of Santee , a charter city organized and operating under the laws of the State of California , hereinafter referred to as Grantee , and Crisis House , a non-profit organization ( DUNS # 602840407 ) , hereinafter referred to as Subrecipient . RECITALS WHEREAS , the Grantee has applied for and received funds from the United States Government under Title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 , Public Law 93-383 ; and WHEREAS , the Grantee wishes to engage the Subrecipient to assist the Grantee in utilizing such funds ; AGREEMENT NOW THEREFORE , IT IS AGREED AS FOLLOWS : 1 . SERVICES The Subrecipient will be responsible for administering a homeless prevention project in a manner satisfactory to the Grantee and consistent with any standards required as a condition of providing these funds . Such program will include the following activities eligible under the Community Development Block Grant Program : A . Provide client services to meet the strategy of homelessness prevention or intervention through a case management process designed to assist needy people to avoid becoming homeless , or to assist those clients who are working toward becoming self-sufficient to return to mainstream society . B. Subrecipient warrants that it has the expertise and experience to perform the work set forth in this Agreement and that it shall perform said work pursuant to this Agreement and as stated in the Statement of Work , attached hereto as Exhibit A incorporated herein by reference . C. Subrecipient shall document performance on a quarterly basis by submittal of a Quarterly Report , attached hereto as Exhibit B incorporated herein by reference . The Subrecipient certifies that the activities carried out with funds provided under this Agreement will meet one or more of the CDBG programs National Objectives , which include : 1 ) benefit low/moderate income persons , 2 ) aid in the prevention or elimination of slums or blight , 3 ) meet community development needs having a particular urgency - as defined in 24 CFR 570.208 . The Grantee will monitor the performance of the Subrecipient against goals and performance standards requited herein . Substandard performance as determined by the Grantee will constitute non-compliance with this Agreement . If action to correct such substandard performance is not taken by the Subrecipient within a reasonable period of time after being notified by the Grantee , contract suspension or termination procedures will be initiated . 2 . TERM OF AGREEMENT AND TIME OF PERFORMANCE Services of the Subrecipient shall start on the 1st day of July 2017 and end on the 30th day of June 2018 . The term of this Agreement and the provisions herein shall be extended to cover any additional time period during which the Subrecipient remains in control of CDBG funds or other assets , including program income . 3 . BUDGET CATEGORY AMOUNT Program Administration $ 5,000 TOTAL EXPENSES $ 5,000 Any indirect costs charged must be consistent with the conditions of Paragraph 9 ( C ) ( ii ) of this Agreement . In addition , the Grantee may require a more detailed budget breakdown than the one contained herein , and the Subrecipient shall provide such supplementary budget information in a timely fashion in the form and content prescribed by the Grantee . Any amendments to this budget must be approved in writing by the Grantee and the Subrecipient . 4 . PAYMENT It is expressly agreed and understood that the total amount to be paid by the Grantee under this contract shall not exceed $ 5,000 . Drawdowns for the payment of eligible expenses shall be made against the line item budgets specified in Paragraph 3 herein and in accordance with performance . Expenses for general administration shall also be paid against the line item budgets specified in Paragraph 3 and in accordance with performance . Payments may be contingent upon certification of the Subrecipients financial management system in accordance with the standards specified in 2 CFR 200.302 . Grantee shall issue payment on a reimbursement basis no more than once per calendar month upon receipt of a completed Request for Reimbursement Report . Copies of the Request for Reimbursement Report forms shall be provided by Grantee . The Request for Reimbursement Report shall identify program expenditures for the period to be reimbursed as follows : 1 . Date of expenditure ; 2 . Payee ; 3 . Purpose of expenditure ; and 4 . Amount of expenditure . Copies of supporting documentation must be attached ; i.e . , receipts , paid invoices , etc . Direct salaries and wages , operational expenditures or other cost objective ( s ) which are chargeable to more than one program must be supported by distribution records . 2 of 18 Approved invoices will be paid within 30 days of the date received by the Finance Department . 5 . NOTICES Communication and details concerning this contract shall be directed to the following contract representatives : Grantee Subrecipient City of Santee Crisis House CDBG Program Administrator Mary Case , Executive Director 10601 Magnolia Avenue 1034 N. Magnolia Avenue Santee , CA 92071-1266 El Cajon , CA 92020 ( 619 ) 258-4100 ( 619 ) 444-3132 Fax ( 619 ) 562-9376 Fax : Fax : ( 619 ) 444-1422 6 . GENERAL CONDITIONS A . General Compliance The subrecipient agrees to comply with the requirements of Title 24 of the Code of Federal Regulations , Part 570 concerning Community Development Block Grants ( CDBG ) . The Subrecipient also agrees to comply with all other applicable Federal , state and local laws , regulations , and policies governing the funds provided under this contract . The Subrecipient further agrees to utilize funds available under this Agreement to supplement rather than supplant funds otherwise available . B . Independent Contractor Nothing contained in this Agreement is intended to , or shall be construed in any manner , as creating or establishing the relationship of employer/employee between the parties . The Subrecipient shall at all times remain an independent contractor with respect to the services to be performed under this Agreement . The Grantee shall be exempt from payment of all Unemployment Compensation , FICA , retirement , life and/or medical insurance and Workers Compensation Insurance as the Subrecipient is an independent subrecipient . C. Grantor Recognition The Subrecipient shall insure recognition of the role of the grantor agency in providing services through this contract . All activities , facilities and items utilized pursuant to this contract shall be prominently labeled as to funding source . In addition , the Subrecipient will include a reference to the support provided herein in all publications made possible with funds made available under this contract . D. Amendments The Grantee or Subrecipient may amend this Agreement at any time provided that such amendments make specific reference to this Agreement , and are 3 of 18 executed in writing , signed by a duly authorized representative of organizations , and approved by the Grantees governing body . Such amendments shall not invalidate this Agreement , nor relieve or release the Grantee or Subrecipient from its obligations under this Agreement . The Grantee may , in its discretion , amend this Agreement to conform with Federal , state or local governmental guidelines , policies and available funding amounts , or for other reasons . If such amendments result in a change in the funding , the scope of services , or schedule of the activities to be undertaken as part of this Agreement , such modifications will be incorporated only by written amendment signed by both Grantee and Subrecipient . E. Suspension or Termination Either party may terminate this contract at any time by giving written notice to the other party of such termination and specifying the effective date thereof at least 30 days before the effective date of such termination . Partial terminations of the Scope of Service in Paragraph 1 .A above may only be undertaken with the prior approval of the Grantee . In the event of any termination for convenience , all finished or unfinished documents , data , studies , surveys , maps , models , photographs , reports or other materiats prepared by the Subrecipient under this Agreement shall , at the option of the Grantee , become the property of the Grantee , and the Subrecipient shall be entitled to receive just and equitable compensation for any satisfactory work within the Scope of Service completed prior to the effective date of termination , and for which compensation has not been received , within 30 days of submission of evidence satisfactory to Grantee of completion thereof . The Grantee may also suspend or terminate this Agreement ,

###

