PROJECT `` A WAY BACK HOME `` GRANT AGREEMENT THIS GRANT AGREEMENT ( `` Agreement `` ) is made as of this . day of October , 2020 , by and between the CITY OF EL CAJON , a public body corporate and politic ( the `` City `` ) and THE SALVATION ARMY , a California corporation ( hereinafter referred to as `` Grant Recipient `` ) . The City and the Grant Recipientare collectively referred toasthe `` Parties . `` RECITALS A . On July 14 , 2020 , the City Council of the City of El Cajon approved the funding of `` ' A WAY BACK HOME ' REUNIFICATION PROJECT `` ( the `` Grant `` ) in the amount of not to exceed TEN THOUSAND DOLLARS ( $ 10,000.00 ) ( the `` Grant Award `` ) toGrant Recipient . B . Grant Recipient has proposed a project that reunifies homeless individuals currently residing in El Cajon with families or friends outside of the San Diego County region ( the `` Project `` ) . The Project works with family members and homeless individuals to determine if reunification would be beneficial . The Project also pays for eligible costs associated with transportation , lodging , food and resettlement . C. The Parties desire to enter into an agreement for implementation of the ' `` A WAY BACK HOME ' REUNIFICATION PROJECT `` services , with a Grant Award in the amount of not toexceed TEN THOUSAND DOLLARS ( $ 10,000.00 ) . D. The Grant Award shall be in the form of a reimbursement from the City to Grant Recipient , asdefined in this Grant Agreement , with the intent toservea minimum of twenty ( 20 ) locally residing homeless individuals . AGREEMENT NOW , THEREFORE , in consideration of the recitals stated above , the mutual covenants set forth below , the Parties agree , promise and declare as follows : ARTICLE I . GRANT PROVISIONS Section 1.1 -The Grant Award . The City hereby awards to Grant Recipient , for the purpose of the Project , the Grant Award in the amount of not to exceed TENTHOUSAND DOLLARS ( $ 10,000.00 ) , according to the terms and conditions set forth below : Section 1.2 -No Partnership or Joint Venture . The relationship between the City and Grant Recipient created by this Agreement shall not be one of partnership or joint venture . Section 1.3 -Indemnification . Grant Recipient agrees and promises to protect , defend , indemnify , and hold harmless the City of El Cajon , and its respective elected and appointed officials , officers , directors , agents , employees and representatives from any and all liabilities , losses , damages , including , but notlimited to , claims for injury or death to any person occurring as a result of the Project , including losses from negative cash Project `` A Way Back Home `` Grant Agreement Salvation Army and City of El Cajon Page 1 of 17 flows . It is expressly understood that Grant Recipient is solely and exclusively responsible for any and all management of the Project . Section 1.4 -Term . This Agreement , and the services to be provided by the Grant Recipient , shall be for a period of one ( 1 ) year , beginning October 6 , 2020 and ending October 5 , 2021 ( the `` Term `` or `` Grant Period `` ) . Such term may be extended for two ( 2 ) additional one-year periods upon written agreement of both parties to this Agreement . Section 1.5 -Termination . This Agreement may be terminated in whole or in part at any time by either party upon giving thirty ( 30 ) days written notice to the other party . Unless it is in default of any of the terms , conditions , representations or warranties contained herein , based on any notice of termination provided by City , Grant Recipient shall be entitled to utilize such amounts remaining of the Grant Award for any work performed through the date of termination . Section 1 .6 -Conditions to City Obligations and Covenants of Grant Recipient.The obligation of the City to fund the Grant Award is subject to the following conditions and Grant Recipient agrees to perform any and all covenants hereinafter set forth in a timely manner . ( a ) The City shall reimburse Grant Recipient for eligible expenditures related to the reunification of a homeless individual . ( b ) Upon a written request from Grant Recipient , the City may make cash advances of up to twenty-five percent ( 25 % ) of the Grant Amount for working capital to Grant Recipient . Additional advances of no greater than 25 % shall be requested in writing as each advance is reduced and will be made based on needs as determined by City 's City Manager or such person designated by the City Manager . Any outstanding advances will be returned on or before the termination of this Agreement as either a reduction of the final reimbursement request or atransfer of funds from Grant Recipient . Grant Recipient shall indicate in writing , no later than three ( 3 ) months prior to the termination of thisAgreement , detailing how the advance shall be returned to the City . ( c ) The Grant Recipient certifies and agrees that it will not use funds provided through this Agreement to pay for entertainment , gifts , alcoholic beverages , or unreasonable costs for the purposes set forth in Recital B and pursuant to this Agreement . Grant Recipient further certifies and agrees that it will at no time provide cash directly to homeless individuals that are participants in this Project . ( d ) Grant Recipient shall be eligible for reimbursement if the following criteria are met : 1 . The individual reunited with family or friends shall be a documentedhomeless individual that is residing in the City of El Cajon , Project `` A Way Back Home `` Grant Agreement Salvation Army and City of El Cajon Page 2 of 17 2 . The homeless individual shall be relocated outside of San DiegoCounty , and 3 . Receipts documenting eligible costs are presented in an orderly manner to the City . ( e ) The average cost per relocation is estimated to be $ 500 . If a reimbursement request exceeds $ 600 , Grant Recipient shall seek written approval from the City prior to agreeing to reunification expenditures . ( f ) Grant Recipient shall provide a quarterly status report as defined in Section 1.9 . Quarterly status reports shall be submitted to the City no later than : 1 . October 15th for the period of July , August and September ; 2 . January 15th for the period of October , November and December ; 3 . April 15th for the period of January , February and March ; and 4 . July 15th for the period of April , May and June . A final report at the conclusion of the grant period shall also be provided . ( g ) Grant Recipient represents , warrants and agrees that : ( i ) funds reimbursed by the City pursuant to this Agreement are advanced wholly or in part for the benefit of the Grant Recipient , and ( ii ) Grant Recipient is responsible for all obligations created by this Agreement . ( h ) Grant Recipient agrees to and shall use the funds herein solely for and in connection with those purposes set forth in Recital B and pursuant to this Agreement ; ( i ) Grant Recipient shall provide the City with insurance as referenced on Exhibit `` A `` hereto naming the City of El Cajon , and its elected and appointed officials , officers , directors , and employees , as additional insureds , at the sole cost and expense of the Grant Recipient . Said insurance shall remain in full force and effect during the term of this Agreement . Section 1.7 -Grant Recipient 's Representations and Warranties . Grant Recipient represents , warrants and can demonstrate that : ( a ) The Grant Recipient is a validly and lawfully formed nonprofit corporation , is in good standing under California law , whose income is exempt from taxation under section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) of the Internal Revenue Code ; ( b ) Execution of this Agreement has been duly authorized by the GrantRecipient and shall not result , with the passage of time or the giving of notice , or both , in breach of , or in acceleration of , performance under any contract or document to which the Grant Recipient may be a party ; ( c ) All approvals have been obtained in connection with the Grant Recipient 's execution of

###

