PROJECT `` A WAY BACK HOME `` GRANT AGREEMENT THIS GRANT AGREEMENT ( `` Agreement `` ) is made as of this I lPday of ? ) 19 , by and between the CITY OF EL CAJON , a public body corporate and politic ( the `` City `` ) and RTHecEip iSeAnLt `` V ) . ATThIeO CNi tyA RanMdY t , h ea GCraalnifto Rrneiaci pcieonrpt oarraet icoonl le ( hcteivreeilnya rfetefer rrreedfe trore ads tthoe a `` sP a `` rGtireasn . `` t RECITALS A. oOfn `` A'Au gWusAt Y8 , B2A01C7K , thHeO CMiEty ' CRoEuUncNilI FoIfC tAheT ICOiNty oPfR EOl JCEaCjoTn `` a ( pthpero v `` Gedra tnhte `` ) fuinn dtihneg amount of not to exceed TEN THOUSAND DOLLARS ( $ 10,000.00 ) ( the `` Grant Awardu ) to Grant Recipient . B . Grant Recipient has proposed a project that reunifies homeless individuals currently residing in El Cajon with families or friends outside of the San Diego hCoomunetlye srse ignidoinvi d ( uthaels `` toP rdoejetecrtm `` ) .i neT ifh ree uPnrioficjeacttio nw owrokus ldw biteh bfeanmeifliyc iaml . eTmhbee Prsr oajencdt saelstotle pmaeyns t.f or eligible costs associated with transportation , lodging , food and reC . As of February 28 , 2019 , the initial Grant Award has been fully expended and thirtyonfin thee ( 3r9e ) g iinond.i viBdausaelsd h oanv teh be eseunc cseuscsc eosf sthfuell yP rroejuencitt , e tdh ew iPtha rftaiemsi ldye osri rferi eton dresn oeuwts tihdee aPgRrOeeJmECenTt `` sfoerr vcicoenst , i nwuiathti oan n eowf Gthrea n `` t ' AA wWarAdY in BthAeC aKm HouOnMt oEf ' nRotE tUo NeIxFcIeCeAdT ION TEN THOUSAND DOLLARS ( $ 10,000.00 ) . D. RTheec ipGierannt , t aAsw daerdfi nsehda ilnl bthei sin G trhaen fto Armgr eoefm ae rneti , m wbiuthrs tehme einntet nfrto tmo stheerv Ce iaty mtoin Gimraumnt of twenty ( 20 ) locally residing homless individuals . AGREEMENT NOW , THEREFORE , in consideration of the recitals stated above , the mutual covenants set forth below , the Parties agree , promise and declare as follows : ARTICLE I . GRANT PROVISIONS Section 1.1 - The Grant Award . The City hereby awards to Grant Recipient , for the purpose of the Project , the Grant Award in the amount of not to exceed TEN THOUSAND DOLLARS ( $ 10,000.00 ) , according to the terms and conditions set forth below : Section 1.2 - No Partnership or Joint Venture . and Grant Recipient created by this Agreement shall Tnhoet breel aotnioen sohf ippa brtentewresehnip thoer jCoiintyt venture . Section 1.3 - Indemnification . defend , indemnify , and hold harmless tGhera Cnitt yR oefc Eipli eCnatj oang , raeneds iatsn rde spproemctiisvees e lteoc pterdo taenctd , appointed officials , officers , directors , agents , employees and representatives from any Project `` A Way Back Home `` Grant Agreement Safvation Army and City of El Cajon April 10 , 2019 Page 1 of17 and all liabilities , losses , damages , including , but not limited to , claims for injury or death to any person occurring as a result of the Project , including losses from negative cash flows . It is expressly understood that Grant Recipient is solely and exclusively responsible for any and all management of the Project . Section 1.4 - Termination . This Agreement and the relationship created herein shall terminate upon full satisfaction of all of Grant Recipient 's obligations under this Agreement , or the exhaustion of the Grant Award unless Grant Recipient is found to be in breach of this Agreement . The City reserves the right to terminate this Agreement in the event Grant Recipient is deemed to be in default of any of the obligations herein . Section 1.5 - Conditions to City Obligations and Covenants of Grant Recipient . The obligation of the City to fund the Grant Award is subject to the following conditions and Grant Recipient agrees to perform any and all covenants hereinafter set forth in a timely manner . ( a ) The City shall reimburse Grant Recipient for eligible expenditures related to the reunification of a homeless individual . ( b ) Upon a written request from Grant Recipient , the City may make cash advances of up to twenty-five percent ( 25 % ) of the Grant Amount for working capital to Grant Recipient . Additional advances of no greater than 25 % shall be requested in writing as each advance is reduced and will be made based on needs as determined by City 's City Manager or such person designated by the City Manager . Any outstanding advances will be returned on or before the termination of this Agreement as either a reduction of the final reimbursement request or a transfer of funds from Grant Recipient . Grant Recipient shall indicate in writing , no later than three ( 3 ) months prior to the termination of this Agreement , detailing how the advance shall be returned to the City . ( c ) The Grant Recipient certifies and agrees that it will not use funds provided through this Agreement to pay for entertainment , gifts1 alcoholic beverages , or unreasonable costs for the purposes set forth in Recital Band pursuant to this Agreement . Grant Recipient further certifies and agrees that it will at no time provide cash directly to homeless individuals that are participants in this Project . ( d ) Grant Recipient shall be eligible for reimbursement if the following criteria are met : 1 . The individual reunited with family or friends shall be a documented homeless indiVldual that is residing in the City of El Cajon , 2 . The homeless individual shall be relocated outside of San Diego County , and 3 . Receipts documenting eligible costs are presented in an orderly manner to the City . Project ' Way Back Home `` Grant Agreement Salvation Army and City of El Cajon April 10 , 2019 Page 2 of 17 ( e ) The average cost per relocation is estimated to be $ 500 . If a reimbursement request exceeds $ 600 , Grant Recipient shall seek written approval from the City prior to agreeing to reunification expenditures . ( f ) Grant Recipient shall provide a quarterly status report as defined in Section 1.8 . Quarterly status reports shall be submitted to the City no later than : 1 . October 15th for the period of July , August and September ; 2 . January 15th for the period of October , November and December ; 3 . April 15th for the period of January , February and March ; and 4 . July 15th for the period of April , May and June . A final report at the conclusion of the grant period shall also be provided . ( g ) Grant Recipient represents , warrants and agrees that : ( i ) funds reimbursed by the City pursuant to this Agreement are advanced wholly or in part for the benefit of the Grant Recipient , and ( ii ) Grant Recipient is responsible for all obligations created by this Agreement . ( h ) Grant Recipient agrees to and shall use the funds herein solely for and in connection with those purposes set forth in Recital B and pursuant to this Agreement ; ( i ) Grant Recipient shall provide the City with insurance as referenced on Exhibit `` A `` hereto naming the City of El Cajon , and its elected and appointed officials , officers , directors , and employees , as additional insureds , at the sole cost and expense of the Grant Recipient . Said Insurance shall remain in full force and effect during the term of this Agreement . Section 1.6 - Grant Recipient 's Representations and Warranties . Grant Recipient represents , warrants and can demonstrate that : ( a ) The Grant Recipient is a validly and lawfully formed nonprofit corporation , is in good standing under California law , whose income is exempt from taxation under section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) of the Internal Revenue Code ; ( b ) Execution of this Agreement has been duly authorized by the Grant Recipient and shall not result , with the passage of time or the giving of notice , or both , In breach of , or in acceleration of , performance under any contract or document to which the Grant Recipient may be a party ; ( c ) All approvals have been obtained in connection with the Grant Recipient 's execution of this Agreement and related agreements and documents , to the effect that no breach of or acceleration of performance under any other agreement or document to which Grant Recipient is a party will result from such execution ; and ( d )

###

