The Valley of Opportunity ( lo o , : , , Porate0 August 22 , 2019 MExse . cTurtiisvhea D Birreecretotor n 3In5te30rf aCitahm Sinhoe ltdeerl NReiotw Noorkrt ho fS Suaitne D3i0e1g o El Cajon , CA 92108 USPS TtffiCKING # 9489 1090-0027 6000 4481 97 INSURANCE < = $ 500 : FOR TRACKING GO TO USPS.COM Community Development RE : FY 2019-20 Agreement for Use of CDBG Funds CFDA No . : 14.218 ( Community Development Block Grant ) Dear Ms. Brereton : DEniecgloos'se da gyroeue mweilln fti nfodr au sfuel loyf eCxDecBuGte fdu ncdosp yfo or ft hInet eurfpacoithm .iSnhge pltreorg Nraemtw yoerka ro 2f 0S1a9n- g2r0a2n0t . agTrheee mCeityn'tss Awnitnhu aHlU ADc thioanv eP lnaont hyaest bneoet ny eetx ebecuetne da.p pHroovweedv ebry , HHUUDD ahnads 2ad0v1i9s , e db uut st hthea tC istyu bwreilcl ipbiee nrtesq muiraeyd bteog iwna tiot uinnctiul rw per ohgaravme HcUosDts aapsp roofv aJul lay n1d , erexiemcbuutersde gyroaunrt aaggerenecmy . ents in place before we may draw down HUD funds to DIni etghoe ' sm geraanntti mfoer , FaYs 2 a0l1l 9o-t2h0e2r 0c aopnpdeitiaorn tso ohfa vInet ebrefaeinth m Seht , e ilntecrl uNdientgw ocrokm opfl eStiaonn oefx ptehned ietunrveisro angmaiennstta tlh eresevi efuwn dfso ra sy oofu Jr ulpyr o1j , e 2c0t,1 9y.o u may begin to obligate fIfo rywoaur dh atov ew oarnkyin gq uweitshti oynosu afegeali nfr etheis t oye caor.n tact me at ( 619 ) 441-1786 . I look Sincerely , \n vga Mn aRnaavgeesrt e : n Encl . City of El Cajon 200 Civic Center Way El Cajon , CA 92020 Planning ( 619 ) 441-1742 Building and Fire Safety ( 619 ) 441-1726 Housing ( 619 ) 441-1710 www.cityofelcajon.us AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE CITY OF EL CAJON AND Interfaith Shelter Network of San Diego THIS AGREEMENT is made and entered into this { .st day of Ju/ t , 2019 , by and between the CITY OF EL CAJON , a municipal corporation , hereinafter referred t as `` City , `` and Interfaith Shelter Network of San Diego , a nonprofit organization under the laws of the State of California , hereinafter referred to as `` Subrecipient `` ; WHEREAS , there exists a need within the City of El Cajon to provide a variety of services , including housing , recreational , educational , and child care services and developmental programs ; and WHEREAS , the Subrecipient has expressed a desire and has the expertise and experience to operate the program entitled `` Rotational Emergency Shelter Program `` in El Cajon ; and WHEREAS , the City has entered into a contract with the United States of America through its Department of Housing and Urban Development , hereinafter called HUD , to execute the City 's Community Development Block Grant , hereinafter called CDBG , program under the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 , as amended , hereinafter called the `` Act `` . NOW , THEREFORE , IT IS HEREBY MUTUALLY AGREED by and between the parties hereto as follows : 1 . 2 . City Review : The City reserves the right to review and approve actions and decisions taken by the Subrecipient with respect to the operation of the Rotational Emergency Shelter Program for compliance with all applicable regulations . Subrecipient Status : The City recognizes the Subrecipient as an independent nonprofit organization and agrees to cooperate in protecting its image as a politically neutral organization . 3 . Service Area : 4 . The Service area is City-wide in the City of El Cajon . Scope of Services : The Subrecipient shall perform all services described in the project description and Scope of Work and Budget set forth as Exhibit `` A `` to this Agreement , a copy of which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by this reference . 5 . Time of Performance : Said services of the Subrecipient are to commence no sooner than July 1 , 2019 , and shall be completed no later than June 30 , 2020 . 6 . Compensation and Method of Payment : 7 . The City shall reimburse the Subrecipient for allowable costs incurred under the scope of the Agreement and applicable Federal regulations , which have not been paid for or reimbursed in any other manner by any other Agency or private source of funding .. The total of all reimbursements shall not exceed Ten Thousand and no/100s dollars ( $ 10,000.00 ) . Compliance with Laws and Assurances : The Subrecipient hereby assures and certifies that it has complied with and will continue to comply with the Housing and Community Development Act of 197 4 , hereinafter called the Act , and all current and future applicable federal , state , and local laws , ordinances , regulations , policies , guidelines , and requirements as they relate to acceptance and use of Federal funds for this federally assisted program . This Agreement is subject to all such laws , ordinances , regulations , policies , guidelines , and requirements including without limitation , the Act , Title 24 , Code of Federal Regulations , Parts 84 , 85 and 200 ; Title 24 , Code of Federal Regulations , Part 570 ; Title 29 Code of Federal Regulations , Parts 3 and 5 ; Title 24 Code of Federal Regulations Part 70 ; Public Law 87-581 ; and applicable Circulars of the U.S. Office of Management Budget , hereinafter called 0MB , including without limitation , A-87 , A-110 , A- 122 , A-128 , and A-133 . 1 8 . 9 . 10 . Records Retention : The Subrecipient shall maintain and retain all financial records , supporting documents , statistical records and all other records pertaining to the use of the funds provided under this Agreement for a period of four ( 4 ) years at a minimum , and in the event of litigation , claim or audit , the records shall be retained until all litigation , claims , and audit findings involving the records have been fully resolved . Records for non-expendable property acquired with Federal funds provided under this Agreement shall be retained for four ( 4 ) years after the final disposition of such property . Monitoring : The City will conduct periodic program monitoring reviews . These reviews will focus on the extent to which the planned program has been implemented , measurable goals achieved , effectiveness of program management , and impact of the program . Authorized representatives of the City and HUD shall have the right of access to all activities and facilities operated by the Subrecipient under this Agreement . Facilities include all files , records , and other documents related to the performance of this Agreement . Activities include attendance at staff , board of directors , advisory committee , and advisory board meetings and inspection by City and HUD representatives , and to ensure that its employees and board members furnish such information , as in the judgment of City and HUD representatives , may be relevant to the question of compliance with contractual conditions and HUD directives , or the effectiveness , legality and achievements of the program . Program Reporting : The Subrecipient agrees to prepare and submit financial , program progress , evaluations , and other reports as required by HUD or the City . The Subrecipient shall maintain such program , property , personnel , financial and other records and accounts as are considered necessary by HUD or the City to assure proper accounting for all Contract funds . Sub-recipient shall submit all financial requirements in Exhibit `` B `` ( Request for Payment forms ) . All of the Subrecipient 's records , with the exception of confidential client information , shall be made available to representatives of the City and the appropriate Federal agencies . The Subrecipient is required to submit data necessary to complete the Annual Subrecipient Performance Report and other federal documents in accordance with HUD regulations and in the format and at the time designated by the City . Subrecipient shall submit a Periodic Performance Report ( Exhibit `` C `` ) for the reporting period ( may be either monthly or quarterly , as agreed to with the City at time of contract execution ) by the 10th day of the month following the reporting period . The reports shall include the following information : A . Number of individual clients served ( individual client may be a person or a household ) B . Race of clients served C. Ethnicity of clients served ( Hispanic , yes or no - a person may be of any race and be Hispanic ) D. Number of disabled clients served ( as defined by the Social Security Administrative Guidelines ) E. Whether or not the head of the household is female F. Number of clients who are low income

###

